
----------------Page (0) Break----------------

----------------Page (1) Break----------------
Puducherry
JIPMER 
2026 
Policy 
Antibiotic 
----------------Page (2) Break----------------
ii
This guide can be downloaded from the JIPMER website (www.jipmer.edu.in) 
Edition: Year-2026 Edition. Version: 1.0 (202604061000). Date of Publication: 15th April 2026 
Contact Information: Suggestions and Feedback are welcome. Email: jipmerams@jipmer.ac.in 
acknowledge the funding provided by Indian Council of Medical Research, New Delhi. 
Funding Statement: The Antibiotic Policy was developed as a part of the funded project. We 
Conflict of Interest Declaration: None 
management. 
information contained in this publication. Clinical judgment must always prevail in individual patient 
does not constitute medical, or legal advice. All reasonable precautions have been taken to verify the 
This document is intended for educational purposes and for internal circulation within JIPMER only. It 
© 2026 Anti-microbial Stewardship Committee, JIPMER, Puducherry. All rights reserved. 
----------------Page (3) Break----------------
iii
 
Bibliography 
XX                                                                             93 
Appendix
Infective Endocarditis Prophylaxis 
XIX                                                                            91 
Surgical Prophylaxis 
XVIII                                                                           79 
                                   Antibiotic Dosing for selected antimicrobials 
XVII                                                                           67 
Duration of Antimicrobial Therapy 
XVI                                                                            66 
 Cardiac Infections 
XV                                                                             62 
System
Nervous System Infections 
XIV                                                                            59 
Bone and Joint Infections 
XIII                                                                            57 
-
wise Empiric Therapy     Skin and Soft Tissue Infections 
XII                                                                            49 
Gastrointestinal Infections 
XI                                                                             42 
Urinary Tract Infections 
X                                                                             38 
Respiratory Infections 
IX                                                                             30 
Acute undifferentiated febrile illness - AUFI  
VIII                                                                            26 
CRBSI 
VII                                                                            24 
 
Bacteremia 
VI                                                                             23 
Sepsis 
V                                                                             21 
Introduction 
PK/PD optimization 
IV                                                                             16 
Getting your Antibiotic Right 
III                                                                             11 
Principles of Treatment of Infection and Sepsis 
II                                                                                9 
General Principles of Antibiotic Therapy 
I                                                                                3 
Contributors and Reviewers 
vi 
Acknowledgment s 
vi 
Foreword 
v 
Section                             Title                             Page  
 
Table of Contents
----------------Page (4) Break----------------
iv
----------------Page (5) Break----------------
v
Phone:  0413    2272901                                                                                                                                 E-mail  : director@ipmer.ac.  in
- 
JIPMER,  Puducherry
(Chai rman AMS Com mittee)
Director
Dr. Vir Singh  Negi
within  our institution.
healthcare professionals  and 
will strengthen  antimicrobial  stewardship practices
guideline. 
I am 
confident that this  document will serve  as a valuable  resource for
pharmacists 
who have  contributed their  expertise              development      this
to the                    of 
commend         multidisciplinary  team      clinicians, microbiologists,          clinical
the                                 of                                     and 
I 
use of antimicrobials  empirically.
antimicrobial  stewardship  and are  intended 
to support safe, effective,  and judicious
hospital-acquired settings.  These guidelines 
align         national 
on
with              priorities 
common  infectious  syndromes  encountered       both community-acquired  and
in 
practical,  concise,  and Jocally relevant  recommendations 
for the management  of
The Antimicrobial  Stewardship Plan of JIPMER  have been  developed      provide
to 
the effectiveness  of existing  antimicrobial agents.
support  clinicians      making evidence-based  treatment  decisions while  preserving
in 
informed  by local  microbiological  data and  resistance patterns,  are essential  tools to
promoting  rational  antibiotic use. lnstitution-specific  antimicrobial guidelines,
Healthcare institutions  play     pivotal  role in combating antimicrobial  resistance  by
a 
increased  morbidity,  mortality, healthcare  costs, and prolonged  hospital  stays.
significantly  contributed 
to the growing burden      resistant  infections,  resulting 
in
of 
public health challenges  of the 2lstcentury.  lnappropriate  use of antibiotics  has
Antimicrobial  resistance (AMR) has  emerged       one            most  serious  global
as        of the 
FOREWORD
Frtero
Director
FRCP  (London), FACR,  FAMS,  FIMSA,  FICP
FRCP  (London),  FACR,  FAMS, FIMSA,  FICP
MBBS,  MD, DM,  PGDHHM,
MBBS,  MD,  DM,  PGDHHM,
frrfr                                                                               Dr.                   Negi
#.      fr6                                                                    Vir Singh 
ft 
Dhanvantari  Nagar,  Puducherry,  lndia
Vt/elfare, 
(An  lnstitution  of  National  lmportancd  under  Ministry of Health  &  Family                Government  of lndia)
Jawaharlal  Institute  of Postgraduate Medical Education  and Research
qFkr
rw. gg*S, 
{tlrarq,                                                    5v 
ffi      (Erw{ \'ri qfuqn  o-en"r q;ffi       wron  d o96         a5s      qrern)qrfi                  q{tq 
uffirilETle[  Ht-f,dl-fl{ sTrgfif$rq           \r{ 3n-Esqrq  qTeil-q
fum 
----------------Page (6) Break----------------
vi
Dr. Saka Vinod Kumar, Medical Superintendent, JIPMER 
Approved by:  
Dr. Narayanan P, Professor, Dept. of Paediatrics, JIPMER 
Dr. Sujatha S, Professor, Dept. of Microbiology, JIPMER 
Reviewed by:  
Dr. Venkateswaran R, Professor, Dept. of Medicine, JIPMER 
Dr. Vivekanandan Pillai M, Professor, Dept. of Medicine, JIPMER 
Compiled by: 
Contributors and Reviewers  
resource for its readers. 
stewardship initiatives and quality improvement efforts. We hope that this book will serve as a valuable 
extend our appreciation to the hospital administration for their continued support of antimicrobial 
continues to evolve through ongoing discussions with them on the management of infections.  We also 
colleagues and students for their insightful comments and continued engagement. Our understanding 
developed as part of the aforementioned project. We further extend our appreciation to our 
antimicrobial stewardship and for providing a blinded review of the antibiotic policy. This policy was 
Council of Medical Research (ICMR), New Delhi, for funding the project on the implementation of 
Antimicrobial Stewardship Committee, JIPMER. We also express our deep gratitude to the Indian 
We sincerely acknowledge the reviewers and the valuable comments provided by the members of the 
Acknowledgements  
----------------Page (7) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
1 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2026 
 
 
Policy 
Antibiotic 
 
----------------Page (8) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
2 | Page  
                     
 
----------------Page (9) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
3 | Page  
susceptible to amikacin.   
However, the vast majority of community acquired ESBL producing gram negative bacilli remain 
classes of antibiotics as well. They are commonly resistant to cotrimoxazole and quinolones. 
ESBL producing pathogens generally carry resistance genes conferring resistance to many other 
life-threatening infections, particularly in high inoculum infections.  
BL/BLI combinations are generally effective, but they may be inferior to carbapenems in severe or 
are ineffective against such bacteria. Such infections should be treated with BL/BLI or carbapenems. 
community acquired enteric Gram-negative bacilli produce ESBL; 3rd or 4th generation cephalosporins 
usually caused by enteric Gram-negative bacilli such as E coli, Klebsiella etc.  Over 3/4th of even 
Gram negative bacilli are important pathogens in UTI and intra-abdominal infections. They are 
carbapenems.  
infections caused by ESBL producing pathogens but in seriously ill patients they may be inferior to 
combinations are useful in treating mild to moderate 
effective against ESBL producing pathogens. BL/BLI 
Cefoperazone/Sulbactam 
lactam (BL) with beta lactamase inhibitor (BLI) is usually 
Piperacillin/Tazobactam 
spectrum beta lactamases.  So, a combination of beta 
Amoxicillin/Clavulanic acid 
Beta lactamase inhibitors are able to inhibit extended 
Ampicillin/Sulbactam 
C BL producing bacteria. 
...BL/BLI combinations 
cephalosporin cefepime is generally effective against Amp 
Fourth    -                         Cefepime  
generation cephalosporins but the 4th generation 
Amp C beta lactamases confer resistance against 3rd 
Cefixime            Ceftazidime  
Cefpodoxime   Cefoperazone 
acquired E. coli produce ESBL.  
Third   Cefdinir             Ceftriaxone 
and Klebsiella. In India, over 3/4th of even community 
very common among gram negative bacilli such as E. coli 
Cefoxitin  
marker of ESBL production. ESBL production has become 
Second   Cefuroxime      Cefuroxime  
cephalosporins. Ceftriaxone resistance is taken as the 
First   Cephalexin       Cefazolin  
ESBL confer resistance against 3rd and 4th generation 
Gen           Oral              Parenteral 
Amp C beta lactamases (Amp C BL) 
 Table 1. List of cephalosporins... 
Extended spectrum beta lactamases (ESBL) and 
There are two types of very broad-spectrum beta lactamases. 
negative bacilli  
has increasingly rendered 3rd and 4th generation cephalosporins largely ineffective against Gram 
generation cephalosporins. However, of late the emergence of very broad-spectrum beta lactamases 
action of these beta lactamases. So, the drugs of choice for these pathogens were 3rd or 4th 
generation cephalosporins. However, third and fourth generation cephalosporins are resistant to the 
extended spectrum penicillins and first generation cephalosporins as well as some second 
bacteria started producing road spectrum beta lactamases. These beta lactamases inactivate 
spectrum penicillins (ampicillin, amoxicillin, piperacillin) as well as cephalosporins. Later, these 
to penicillin. However, the majority of gram-negative bacilli were originally susceptible to extended 
Treatment of infections due to Gram -negative bacilli: Gram negative bacilli are intrinsically resistant 
I.   General principles of antibiotic therapy 
 
----------------Page (10) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
4 | Page  
 
Carbapenems                  Yes                                Yes                                Yes                                Yes 
 
infections
 
combination                                                                                  or life-threatening 
Yes                                Yes                                                                      No 
carbapenems in severe 
BL/BLI 
inferior to 
Yes, but may be 
cephalosporins 
Yes                                Yes                                No                                Yes 
4th generation 
(parenteral) 
cephalosporins   Yes                                Yes                                No                                 No 
3rd generation 
cephalosporins 
Yes                            May be                            No                                 No 
2nd generation 
cephalosporins 
Yes                                No                                No                                 No 
1rst generation 
Piperacillin  
Yes                                No                                No                                 No 
Carboxy penicillin 
Amoxycillin  
Ampicillin,   Yes                                No                                No                                 No 
Aminopenicillins: 
resistant 
Penicillin G                                                         -                                    -                                    - 
Intrinsically 
Beta lactam drug        negative bacilli              lactamases                      (ESBL)                      lactamases 
enteric Gram-  spectrum beta  beta lactamases   Amp C beta 
Susceptibility of producing broad Extended spectrum bacilli producing 
negative bacilli bacilli producing          Gram-negative 
enteric Gram-  Gram-negative  Susceptibility of 
Susceptibility of Susceptibility of 
 Table 2. Susceptibility of Gram-negative bacilli to Beta lactams 
cephalosporins remain the choice.  
meningitis and pneumonia. There, BL/BLI or carbapenems are generally not required; 3rd generation 
ESBL coverage is not required for community acquired infections above diaphragm, such as 
BL/BLI combinations do not work well against Amp C producing bacteria 
Note: Beta lactamase inhibitors have only limited efficacy against Amp C beta lactamases; hence 
well. This is gradually leading us to a post-antibiotic era ruled by superbugs. 
negative bacilli are increasing in prevalence, and we are beginning to lose these potent weapons as 
effective against even ESBL or Amp C producing bacteria. However, carbapenemase producing gram 
Carbapenems are not inactivated by extended spectrum or Amp C beta lactamases. They are 
 
----------------Page (11) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
5 | Page  
These strains are resistant to all beta lactams including the methicillin group, cephalosporins, 
Since the binding site is altered, none of the beta lactams are effective against these staphylococci. 
In the last several decades, staphylococci with altered penicillin binding protein (PBP) have emerged. 
very poor activity against staphylococci. 
against staphylococci. Some third generation cephalosporins such as cefixime and ceftazidime have 
efficacy.  Cefepime, the 4th generation cephalosporin and carbapenems also have modest activity 
second generation cephalosporins and the third generation cephalosporins have only modest 
Among cephalosporins, first generation cephalosporins are highly effective against MSSA. Many 
susceptible to methicillin, they are called MSSA.   
resistant penicillins, cephalosporins and BL/BLI combinations. Since these staphylococci are 
cephalosporins and BL/BLI combinations. So, drugs of choice for staphylococci today are penicillinase 
staphylococcal penicillinase is a narrow spectrum penicillinase and does not inactivate 
clinically. Only cloxacillin and flucloxacillin are available in India.  It must be noted that the 
methicillin, oxacillin, cloxacillin, dicloxacillin, flucloxacillin and nafcillin. Methicillin is no longer used 
resistant to the action of penicillinase. This group is called the methicillin group and includes 
penicillin.  To overcome this problem, penicillinase resistant penicillins were developed. They are 
such as ampicillin, amoxicillin, and piperacillin. Now over 90% of the strains are resistant to 
penicillinase which inactivates penicillin and its broad spectrum and extended spectrum derivatives 
Staph. aureus strains were fully susceptible to penicillin. But over the years, they started producing 
Staphylococcal infections: Once upon a time, 
Ciprofloxacin              NA                     10% 
invasive isolates). 
Tetracycline            58%                   79% 
streptococci (studies included invasive and non -
Resistance pattern of group A beta haemolytic                     Clindamycin            33%                   33% 
Tetracycline resistance is very high                                        Erythromycin            53%                   46% 
33% (both as per AIIMS 2018, JIPMER 2019). 
Penicillin              0%                      0% 
clindamycin resistance is seen in about one third 
strains of group A beta haemolytic streptococci;                                             JIPMER 2019     AIIMS 2018 
Macrolide resistance is seen in about half the 
haemolytic streptococci 
Table 3.  Resistance among group A beta 
2018). 
susceptible to penicillin and amoxicillin. (AIIMS 
Streptococcal infections: Beta-haemolytic streptococci of all groups (A, B, C, F, G) remain uniformly 
amikacin resistance is becoming increasingly common among hospital acquired gram negative bacilli.  
community acquired gram negative bacilli (>90%) remain susceptible to amikacin. However, 
Gentamicin resistance is common even among community acquired pathogens but most of the 
now well over 2/3rd of even community acquired gram negative bacilli are quinolone resistant. 
Similarly, originally quinolones had excellent activity against most of the gram -negative bacilli, but 
resistant to co-trimoxazole.  
negative bacilli, well over 2/3rd of even community acquired E. coli and Klebsiella isolates are now 
production): Even though originally cotrimoxazole was a very effective antibiotic against many gram-
Other antibiotics for infections with gram negative bacilli (irrespective of beta lactamase 
do not produce ESBL.  They remain susceptible to 3rd and 4th generation cephalosporins and BL/BLI.  
important respiratory pathogens. They commonly produce broad-spectrum beta lactamase, but they 
Note: Haemophilus influenza and Moraxella catarrhalis are gram negative coccobacilli. They are 
 
----------------Page (12) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
6 | Page  
skin, soft tissue infections or osteomyelitis.  
evidence that linezolid is superior to TMP/SMX, doxycycline, or clindamycin in the management of 
Rifampicin should NEVER be used as monotherapy because resistance develops rapidly. There is no 
quickly. Monotherapy with fluoroquinolones for S. aureus infections is not recommended. 
be used to cover for MRSA. Resistance to fluoroquinolones in S. aureus is common and develops 
Macrolides are ineffective against MRSA even if sensitive as per AST in vitro and they should never 
inducible clindamycin resistance.  
macrolides; in case of macrolide resistance, clindamycin should be used only if D test rules out 
cotrimoxazole or clindamycin. Clindamycin should be used only if the isolate is sensitive to 
escalation should be considered if the isolate is sensitive to other drugs such as doxycycline, 
choice (except for infective endocarditis, where the efficacy of linezolid is not well established). De-
the choice and linezolid is an alternate 
Ciprofloxacin            83%              78%              90% 
infections due to MRSA vancomycin is 
Erythromycin            56%              46%              72% 
For empirical therapy of severe    Cotrimoxazole            32%              27%              39% 
Clindamycin            26%              21%              34% 
samples.  
Tetracycline            11%               8%               15% 
2021); includes OPD, IP, as well as ICU 
All SA            MSSA            MRSA  
 
Resistance among Staphylococci (ICMR 
Table 4. Resistance among Staphylococci 
MSSA and MRSA to doxycycline is much lower as compared to clindamycin and cotrimoxazole.  
best choice among the three, in the Indian setting; ICMR surveillance data 2018 shows resistance of 
MRSA and can be used for empirical therapy of mild to moderate MRSA infection. Doxycycline is the 
Treatment of MRSA: Doxycycline, clindamycin and cotrimoxazole are commonly effective against 
and such strains will not respond to clindamycin therapy 
Such strains may be identified by D test. Positive D test indicates inducible clindamycin resistance, 
may still be clindamycin resistant due to a phenomenon called inducible clindamycin resistance. 
If a SA strain (whether MSSA or MRSA) is macrolide resistant but clindamycin sensitive, such a strain 
cotrimoxazole and to a lesser extent clindamycin.  
serious infections. However, resistance has become common for macrolides, quinolones, 
include tetracyclines, clindamycin, macrolides, cotrimoxazole, quinolones. They can be used for non-
Other antibiotics which were originally effective against staphylococci (both MSSA and MRSA) 
staphylococcal effect.  
the preferred agents. Cefixime, an oral third generation cephalosporin has very poor anti-
generation and third generation cephalosporins are less effective against staphylococci and are not 
generation cephalosporins (cephalexin, cefazolin) are effective against MSSA. In contrast, second 
piperacillin/tazobactam and cefoperazone sulbactam are also active against staphylococci. First 
clavulanate are effective against MSSA. Other BL/BLI combinations such as ampicillin/sulbactam, 
Treatment of MSSA: Amoxicillin is ineffective against staphylococci. Cloxacillin and amoxycillin-
particularly true for MRSA.  
increasingly common among both MSSA and MRSA due to different resistant mechanisms. This is 
antibiotics such as macrolides, tetracyclines, cotrimoxazole, clindamycin and quinolones has become 
efficacy of other classes of antibiotics against Staphylococci. However, resistance to other classes of 
Since penicillinase production and altered PBP affect only beta lactams, they do not influence the 
cephalosporins have been developed which are effective against MRSA). 
carbapenems as well as BL/BLI combinations. They are called MRSA. (Recently some fifth generation 
 
----------------Page (13) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
7 | Page  
showed that penicillin and ceftriaxone susceptibility among non-meningeal invasive isolates was 98% 
community acquired pyogenic meningitis should be ceftriaxone with vancomycin. The same data 
susceptibility is only 23% and ceftriaxone susceptibility is only 67%. So, empiric therapy for 
ICMR AMR surveillance data for the year 2021 shows that, among meningeal isolates penicillin 
and 8% from blood). However, all the isolates had MIC less than 1 μg/mL. 
(57%) were penicillin non-susceptible (Murthy et al, 2014 to 2017, 134 total isolates, 11% from CSF 
isolates collected during the period 2011 to 2015. In a study from JIPMER, 8 of the 14 CSF isolates 
Indian study by Manoharan et al showed that 17% penicillin non-susceptibility among meningitis 
susceptibility of 28.5% among meningitis strains at CMC, Vellore in the year 2016. A multicentre 
Indian data: Varghese et al found penicillin non-susceptibility of 42.8% and ceftriaxone non-
with MIC of 2 μg/mL or above will not respond to oral therapy. 
respond to double the usual doses of amoxicillin (1000 mg tid or 90mg/kg/day in children). Strains 
45mg/kg/day in children); strains with MIC of 0.12 to 1 μg/mL are considered intermediate and 
considered susceptible and respond to usual doses of amoxicillin (500 mg tid in adults and 
plasma levels, oral therapy is effective only if the MIC is low; strains with MIC of ≤0.06 μg/mL are 
Oral therapy for otitis media, sinusitis and CAP: Since oral therapy can achieve only much lower 
pneumonia, IV penicillin G is effective as long as the MIC of the strain is ≤4 μg/mL.  
Treatment of infections outside the CNS with IV therapy: For infections outside CNS such as 
μg/mL). If the MIC is ≥0.12 μg/mL or above, penicillin becomes ineffective.  
achieved in CSF are sufficient to kill the bacteria only if the MIC of the strain is very low (≤0.06 
is only 0.02% of that of plasma, increasing to 20% with strong meningeal inflammation. Levels 
Treatment of meningitis: Penicillin penetrates the uninflamed meninges poorly. CSF level of penicillin 
of the strain as well as the site of infection and the dose and route of the antibiotic.  
MIC is a measure of sensitivity of bacteria to antibiotics. The success of therapy depends on the MIC 
 
MIC: Minimum inhibitory concentration (for penicillin), IV: Intravenous 
(MIC μg/mL)      not effective                    effective                            not effective 
Resistance    ≥0.12 Penicillin G is      ≥8 Penicillin G is not     ≥2 Oral Amoxicillin 
divided doses 
(MIC μg/mL)                                                                                                1000 mg tid 
-                        24 MU per day in 6 
Intermediate                                                                                              =0.12-1 Amoxicillin 
=4 Penicillin G 18 to 
divided doses                  divided doses 
(MIC μg/mL)                                                                                                500 mg tid 
MU per day in 6            MU per day in 6 
Susceptible                                                                                              ≤0.06 Amoxicillin 
≤0.06 Penicillin G 24     ≤2 Penicillin G 12 
sinusitis) 
the MIC                                                                                  pneumonia) 
(e.g., otitis media, 
amoxicillin depending on          Meningitis, IV route          infections, IV route (e.g., 
infections, oral route 
Dose of penicillin G and                                                              For non-meningeal 
Non meningeal 
Table 5. Susceptibility breakpoint based antibiotic dosing for Pneumococcus 
are becoming increasingly common in India.  
resistance has slowly emerged over the years due to altered penicillin binding protein. Such strains 
Pneumococcal infections: Originally, pneumococci were exquisitely sensitive to penicillin. However, 
 
----------------Page (14) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
8 | Page  
                                                           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
advantage against pneumococci as compared to BL alone. 
binding site and not due to production of beta lactamase; hence, BL/BLI combinations offer no 
oral beta lactam against these strains. Resistance in pneumococci is due to modification of the 
as cefpodoxime or cefdinir are also effective but high dose amoxicillin remains the most effective 
ineffective and double the usual doses are recommended. Oral third generation cephalosporins such 
treatment of CAP or sinusitis or otitis media due to such strains, usual dose of amoxicillin is 
resistance (MIC of 0.12-1 μg/mL) have become increasingly common in India. For the outpatient 
MIC of the strain is 0.06 μg/mL or less. However, pneumococci with intermediate penicillin 
infections is 500 mg tid in adults and 45 mg/kg/day in children. Such a dose is effective only if the 
Oral therapy for otitis media, sinusitis, and CAP: The usual dose of amoxicillin for the above 
is highly effective, and addition of vancomycin is generally not warranted.  
and 98%, respectively. For pneumococcal infections outside CNS, high dose penicillin or ceftriaxone 
 
----------------Page (15) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
9 | Page  
narrow spectrum antibiotic therapy; escalation to broader spectrum therapy may be needed in 
spectrum antibiotic coverage is generally not warranted; in such cases one may initiate appropriate 
Infection without sepsis is not generally a medical emergency and, in such patients, aggressive broad 
 
hydronephrosis with stone removal or stent) are important.  
source reduction (drainage of abscess), relief of obstruction (relief of ureteric obstruction and 
culture reports become available or once the patient improves significantly. Other measures such as 
reports; de-escalation to the antibiotic with the narrowest spectrum possible should be done once 
antimicrobial therapy should be initiated to cover for likely pathogens while waiting for culture 
Sepsis represents medical emergency and needs to be treated aggressively; broad spectrum 
  
and the need to minimize the use of broad spectrum and reserve drugs. 
So, it is important to strike a balance between the need to provide appropriate empirical therapy 
  
consequences. This helps in limiting the use of broad spectrum and reserve drugs. 
appropriate for mild to moderate infections where failure of initial therapy does not have serious 
Switch to broader spectrum drug or add additional drugs only if initial therapy fails. This approach is 
 Escalation approach: Start with limited spectrum antibiotic appropriate for the infection; 
 
threatening situations where inappropriate empirical therapy has serious consequences. 
after culture reports or clinical improvement. This approach should be limited for serious or life-
De-escalation approach: Start with broad spectrum and or combination therapy and deescalate 
There are two approaches to antibiotic therapy:  
  
much higher in those with shock as compared to those without ( ≥40 versus ≥10 percent) 
to maintain a MAP of  ≥65 mmHg plus elevated lactate level ( >2 mmol/L or >18 mg/dL). Mortality is 
A score of ≥2 suggests sepsis. Septic  shock is defined as hypotension requiring vasopressor therapy 
  
•    Systolic blood pressure  ≤100 mmHg] 
•    Altered mentation.  
•    Respiratory rate ≥22/minute 
qSOFA score has been used to identify sepsis. qSOFA score consists of 3 components.  
  
mortality; so, it is critically important that sepsis is recognized early and treated effectively.  
organ dysfunction. Development of sepsis/organ dysfunction significantly increases morbidity and 
host, co-morbidities etc. Source control and effective antimicrobial therapy can prevent or lim it the 
as virulence of the pathogen, microbial load, immune status of the host, physiological reserve of the 
response. Whether infection proceeds t o sepsis/organ dysfunction depends on several factors such 
to organ dysfunction, it is called sepsis. Organ dysfunction is usually the result of dysregulated host 
untreated infection and bacteraemia can potentially lead to organ dysfunction. When infection leads 
infection is accompanied by bacteraemia there is no organ dysfunction in the earl y stages, but 
interplay of infection and host response may lead to organ dysfunction. Note that even when 
Infection vs sepsis: In the early stages of infection, the organ function is normal, but over time, the 
 
Sepsis = infection  + life threatening organ dysfunction caused by infection  
 
dysfunction is usually not a medical emergency.   
to be started as soon as possible ideally within one hour. However, infection with out organ 
to infection leading to life threatening organ dysfunction; it is a medical emergency; antibiotics need 
Treatment of infection vs sepsis: It is important to differentiate infection from sepsis. Sepsis refers 
II.  Principles of treatment of infection and sepsis 
 
----------------Page (16) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
10 | Page  
                                                           
  
 
Enteric fever    Salmonella typhi 
Leptospirosis    Leptospira 
Scrub typhus    Orientia tsutsugamushi 
Malaria    Plasmodium spp. 
Systemic febrile illnesses due to specific pathogens 
Staphylococcal TSS  
Toxin mediated  
Streptococcal TSS 
spectrum antibiotic therapy, etc.) 
Fungi  
Candida, others (particularly if there is immunocompromise, prolonged broad 
bacteria    streptococci 
Gram positive    Staphylococcus aureus, pneumococcus, Streptococcus pyogenes, other 
bacteria    Acinetobacter, Pseudomonas (usually HCAI) 
Gram negative    E. coli, Klebsiella (community acquired) 
Common pathogens causing sepsis/septic shock (non-neutropenic adults) 
Table 6. Common cause of sepsis and systemic febrile illness  
 
 
risk; they also need aggressive therapy.
• 
A subset of patients with infection do not meet criteria for sepsis 3 definition but are at high 
progression.  
•    Sepsis 3 definition does not identify all patients at high risk for mortality or disease 
specificity.  
•    Currently, qSOFA score is used to identify sepsis; it has limited sensitivity but good 
 
source reduction alone.  
withhold empirical therapy, until culture results become available. Some patients may respond to 
selected patients as per clinical response or culture results. In many patients, it may be possible to 
 
----------------Page (17) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
11 | Page  
Among community acquired infections, recent hospitalization of at least 5 days within the last 90 
local prevalence of antibiotic resistance in the community, hospital, or the unit under consideration. 
pneumonia, meningitis, etc). Next, we should consider the site of acquisition of infection and the 
factors. First and foremost, we should identify the focus of infection or the ID syndrome (UTI, 
It should cover the likely pathogens. Which pathogens need to be covered depends on several 
with inappropriate therapy. Several factors should be considered in the selection of empiric therapy. 
Right drug:  Administering appropriate empirical therapy is crucial. Mortality significantly increases 
 
administration of appropriate initial empirical antibiotic therapy. 
significantly increases the mortality rate (34% vs 18%). Every effort must be taken to ensure early 
of antibiotic therapy significantly increases mortality. Inappropriate initial empiric therapy also 
antibiotic should be given within one hour, especially in those with septic shock.  Delay in initiation 
Right time: Antibiotic should be administered as early as possible. In patients with sepsis, the 
refrigeration, it should be processed immediately. 
Otherwise, it may be refrigerated at 4 degree C up to 24 hours; but once removed from 
Urine culture: Urine sample for culture should be processed immediately (within 1 to 2 hours). 
etc.)  
Other cultures: Send other relevant cultures based on the suspected source (eg. urine, sputum, pus 
culture).  
sample; put 10 ml in the aerobic bottle and 10 ml in the anaerobic bottle; this is called 1 set of blood 
in the aerobic bottle. (If both aerobic and anaerobic cultures are to be sent, draw 20 ml for each 
resistant organisms suspected). If only aerobic cultures are sent, draw 10 ml for each sample and put 
special situations (suspected infective endocarditis, patient already received antibiotic, highly 
sample through the central line and one through peripheral venipuncture. Take 3 or 4 samples in 
culture, preferably through two different venipunctures. If the patient has a central line, take one 
Blood culture: Take blood cultures before initiating antibiotics; Take at least 2 samples for blood 
available the ID syndrome should be further defined. 
must be sent; making the microbiological diagnosis is crucial. As additional test results become 
laboratory tests that are immediately available. Based on the ID syndrome, the necessary samples 
syndrome. This is primarily based on history and physical examination. It is supplemented by initial 
Right diagnosis is extremely important. First, we need to identify the focus of infection or the ID 
Right diagnosis (identifying the ID syndrome)  
 
•    Right duration 
•    Right dose  
•    Right time 
•    Right drug 
•    Right diagnosis (The ID syndrome) 
The 5 Rs of antibiotic therapy: The clinician should make every attempt to ensure all the following 
Such culture guided therapy is called definitive therapy.  
reports become available, the antibiotics are adjusted as per the organism and sensitivity pattern. 
of illness, place of acquisition, host factors, etc.  This is called empirical therapy. Once culture 
cultures. The initial choice of antibiotics depends on several factors such as site of infection, severity 
Empirical therapy vs definitive therapy: In patients with infection, we start antibiotics after sending 
III. Getting your antibiotic right  
 
----------------Page (18) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
12 | Page  
efficacy against ESBL pathogens.  
2.  BL/BLI combinations provide better Gram-negative coverage including moderate 
emergence of ESBL Gram negative pathogens, their use in sepsis has become limited.   
1.  3rd and 4th generation cephalosporin provide Gram -negative coverage, but with the 
Gram negative coverage: 
In sepsis of unknown focus broad spectrum coverage should be given.   
 
Yes*, but may be inferior to carbapenem in severe or  life threatening infections
 
Carbapenem            Yes                     Yes                     Yes                     Yes                     Yes                     No 
BL/BLI            Yes                    Yes*                    Yes                     Yes                     Yes                     No 
cephalosporin 
generation  Yes                     No                     Yes                     Yes                     No                      No 
3rd or 4th 
bacilli              negative bacilli       Streptococcus               effect 
Enterococcus                MRSA  
pathogen    Gram negative  ESBL gram  Pneumococcus,  Anti- MSSA  
Bacterial 
Gram negative                                                       Gram positive 
Table 7. Spectrum of coverage for the common broad-spectrum antibiotics 
 
12. penetration of the drug into the site of infection 
11. safety of the drug in pregnancy or lactation, if applicable   
10. renal or liver disease (safety as well as need for dose adjustment) 
9.  immunocompetent vs compromised. 
8.  age, comorbidity 
7.  adequateness of source control, in applicable patients 
6.  presence of devices (urinary catheter, central venous catheter etc) 
hospitalization, prior colonization/infection with MDR pathogens) 
5.  risk factors for MDR pathogens in the individual (recent antibiotic use, recent 
4.  local prevalence of resistant pathogens in the community/hospital/unit 
3.  community or hospital acquired (ward acquired, or ICU acquired in case of later) 
2.  severity of illness 
1.  source of infection (ID syndrome) 
Factors influencing the choice of empiric therapy:  
 
meningitis; neonates with immature blood brain barrier are an exception. 
aminoglycosides do not enter the CNS and hence should not be used to cover Gram negative 
consider the entry of the selected drug into the relevant compartment. For example, 
central venous catheters etc increase the probability of Staphylococcal infection. It is important to 
influences the likely pathogens and the need for aggressive therapy. Factors such as the presence of 
acquired infections as compared to ward acquired infections.  Immune status of the patient strongly 
pathogens. Resistant pathogens are more likely in hospital acquired infections, particularly with ICU 
days and recent use of parenteral antibiotics within the last 90 days increase the risk of resistant 
 
----------------Page (19) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
13 | Page  
antibiotic from the same or different class). 
different class, withdrawal of additional antibiotics) or escalation (switching to a broader spectrum 
This often involves de-escalation (switching to a narrower spectrum antibiotic from the same or 
After culture report becomes available the treatment is modified as per the organism and sensitivity. 
negative bacilli. Vancomycin may be added if there is a need to provide MRSA coverage.   
aminoglycoside is often added as a second antibiotic to provide addit ional coverage against gram 
antibiotic generally forms the backbone of empirical therapy. This is called the pivotal antibiotic. An 
available): Empirical antibiotic therapy may consist of one or more antibiotics. A beta-lactam 
The concept of de-escalation and escalation (Method to adjust therapy once culture reports become 
culture guided therapy is called definitive therapy  
become available, the antibiotics are adjusted as per the organism and sensitivity pattern. Such 
of illness, place of acquisition, host factors, etc.  This is called empirical therapy . Once culture reports 
cultures. The initial choice of antibiotics depends on several factors such as site of infection, severity 
Empirical therapy vs definitive therapy: In patients with infection, we start antibiotics after sending 
Right duration:  
 
weight or ideal weight or adjusted weight should be used as per the drug class.   
for significant obesity. In obese individuals the weight used depends on the individual drug. Actual 
Failure to give the loading dose may compromise the therapy. Dose adjustment should also be done 
higher dose per kg. Some drugs need a loading dose that is higher th an the maintenance dose. 
paediatric doses of drugs are different from adult doses expressed as per kg. Often children need 
Dose should be adjusted as per age and body weight in neonates and children. Neonatal and 
  
lactam drugs are removed during dialysis necessitating post dialysis supplementation.   
additional doses should be given for drugs that are removed during RRT. For example, many beta 
dose itself may have to be reduced.  For patients undergoing renal replacement therapy, suitable 
seriously compromise therapy. Only for some nephrotoxic drugs such as aminoglycosides the first 
maintenance dose needs to be reduced as per GFR. Failure to administer the full dose initially may 
eliminated, the initial dose should not be reduced even in the presence of renal failure. Only the 
adjusted as needed in case of renal disease and liver disease. For most antibiotics that are renally 
Right dose: Appropriate dosing of the selected antibiotic is extremely important. Dose should be 
 
the diagnosis is not certain, and the patient is severely ill.   
or malaria need specific therapy. Additional broad-spectrum therapy may be needed if 
Patients with sepsis secondary to tropical infections such as scrub typhus, leptospirosis 
Tropical infections: 
 
6.  Selected patients will require antifungal coverage 
5.  BL/BLI and meropenem provide good enterococcal coverage 
4.  None of the cephalosporins are effective against enterococci 
3.  Additional MRSA coverage should be provided in selected cases 
antibiotics provide MRSA coverage 
generation cephalosporins are the choice for MSSA infections.  None of these 
2.  All provide reasonable MSSA coverage; but penicillinase resistant penicillin and first 
1.  All the above provide good coverage against pneumococci and streptococci  
Gram positive coverage: 
3.  Carbapenems provide excellent Gram-negative coverage against ESBL pathogens  
 
----------------Page (20) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
14 | Page  
                                                           
to a higher rank is escalation. 
Switching from a higher rank to a lower rank is de-escalation. Switching from a lower rank antibiotic 
 
Penicillin 
↑  
1rst generation cephalosporin (cephalexin, cephazolin) or ampicillin 
↑  
2nd generation cephalosporin (cefuroxime) 
↑  
3rd generation cephalosporins (ceftriaxone, cefotaxime) 
↑  
cefoperazone sulbactam 
Beta lactam/ Beta lactamase inhibitor combination (BL/BLI combination): piperacillin tazobactam, 
↑  
Carbapenem 
and narrowest spectrum below)  
Figure 1: Ranking of beta lactam antibiotics in the order of spectrum (broadest spectrum above 
 
----------------Page (21) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
15 | Page  
                                                           
vancomycin. So MSSA should not be treated with vancomycin . 
treatment of serious MSSA infections, the mortality is lower with cloxacillin as compared to 
Scenario 6: The Staph aureus strain is susceptible to cloxacillin and vancomycin (MSSA). In the 
narrowest spectrum antibiotic.   
narrowest spectrum antibiotic to which the organism is sensitive. In example 4, cotrimoxazole is the 
Scenarios 3 and 4: The narrowest spectrum antibiotic should be used. In example 2 ceftriaxone is the 
example, in case of non -bacteraemic pyelonephritis amikacin monotherapy may be used.     
warranted. However, for non -bacteraemic infections amikacin monotherapy can  be used. For 
monotherapy for the treatment of bacteraemic infections. So, escalation to meropenem is 
Scenario 2: Even though the strain is sensitive to amikacin, amikacin is not recommended as 
Additional comments  
Scenario 6
amikacin is also de-escalation.  
sensitive to cloxacillin and vancomycin        piperacillin and amikacin.       de-escalation. Stopping piperacillin and 
Blood culture grows Staph aureus  to cloxacillin; stop  coverage form vancomycin to cloxacillin is 
 
Switch form vancomycin Narrowing down the staphylococcal 
Scenario 5
vancomycin 
tazobactam and amikacin 
resistant to cloxacillin and sensitive to 
stop piperacillin    escalation. 
           Blood culture grows Staph aureus 
Continue vancomycin;  Stopping piperacillin and amikacin is de-
Scenario 4
quinolone                                  vancomycin is de-escalation 
quinolone and cotrimoxazole 
cotrimoxazole or    de-escalation; withdrawal of amikacin and 
piperacillin tazobactam, ceftriaxone, 
tazobactam to      tazobactam to cotrimoxazole or quinolone is 
           Blood culture grows E. coli sensitive to 
Switch from piperacillin Narrowing of the spectrum from piperacillin-
Scenario 3
cotrimoxazole                                                   amikacin and vancomycin      de-escalation  
but resistant to quinolone and  ceftriaxone; stop    withdrawal of amikacin and vancomycin is 
piperacillin tazobactam, ceftriaxone tazobactam to      tazobactam to ceftriaxone is de-escalation; 
 
Blood culture grows E. coli sensitive to Switch from piperacillin Narrowing of the spectrum from piperacillin-
Scenario 2
amikacin, meropenem                                    amikacin and vancomycin      vancomycin is de-escalation 
quinolones etc but sensitive to  meropenem; stop     escalation; withdrawal of amikacin and 
piperacillin tazobactam, cefepime, tazobactam to      piperacillin- tazobactam to meropenem is 
 
Blood culture grows E. coli resistant to Switch from piperacillin Broadening of the spectrum from 
Scenario 1quinolones or cotrimoxazole.  
narrower spectrum antibiotics such as vancomycin 
sensitive to ceftriaxone or any of the amikacin; stop 
           piperacillin tazobactam but not  tazobactam; stop    de-escalation  
Blood culture grows E. coli sensitive to Continue piperacillin  Stopping of unnecessary antibiotics is called 
Culture report                        Definitive therapy                                Comment 
 
Table 8. Possible scenarios pertaining to the case vignette 
scenarios.  
look at some of these possible scenarios and what should be the definitive therapy in each of those 
to be taken. Depending upon what the blood culture grows, several scenarios are possible. Let us 
necessary. Once blood culture results become available, decisions regarding definitive therapy need 
Vancomycin is added as he has a central line in place and empirical MRSA coverage is deemed 
Case vignette: A patient with febrile neutropenia is started on piperacillin tazobactam and amikacin. 
Examples of escalation and de-escalation: 
 
----------------Page (22) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
16 | Page  
3.   AUC/MIC  
2.   The fT>MIC 
1.   The Cmax/MIC ratio 
There are three parameters that influence the rapidity of bacterial killing   
next dose is given.   
exponential manner over time. After some time, the level falls below the MIC and remains so till the 
infusion the plasma level of antibiotic reaches a peak concentration (Cmax) and falls in an 
Determinants of the efficacy of an antibiotic: After an antibiotic  is given as a bolus or a short 
  
only slightly increases the rate of bacterial killing (downslopes do not become much steeper))    
steeper). For Ticarcillin (beta lactams) , increase in the plasma level from 1 MIC to levels up to 64 MIC 
concentration increases , the rate of bacterial killing increases (downslopes become progressively 
increases (downslopes become progressively steeper). For Ciprofloxacin(quinolones)  , as the plasma 
For Tobramycin (aminoglycosides), as the plasma concentration increases the rate of bacterial killing 
 
sloping lines indicates the rate of bacterial killing.  
count goes up over time indicating insufficient antibiotic concentrations. The slope of the down 
count. The slope of the lines indicates rate of bacterial killing. U  psloping lines indicate the colony 
antibiotic increases (shown in multiples of MIC). X axis depicts the time and Y axis depicts the colony 
Figure 2:  The figure shows the rate of bacterial killing when the plasma concentration of the 
 
 
 
further increase the rate of bacterial killing (e.g., beta lactams). This is illustrated below;    
rate; increasing the concentration of the antibiotic at the site over and above the MIC does not 
concentration of the antibiotic in the tissue exceeds MIC, bacterial killing occurs at a relatively same 
plasma level faster is the rate of killing (e.g., aminoglycosides). For other antibiotics, once the 
Plasma concentration of an antibiotic and rate of bacterial killing: For some antibiotics higher the 
 
rate at which the bacterial counts come down over time can   be plotted.  
the bacteria. Once the concentration of the antibiotic exceeds the MIC bacterial killing happens. The 
MIC: MIC is the minimum concentration of the antibiotic that is capable of inhibiting the growth of 
Antimicrobial use may be improved by pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic optimization. 
IV. PK/PD optimization 
 
----------------Page (23) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
17 | Page  
 
Carbapenems                              20%                                              40% 
Cephalosporins                           40%                                              70% 
Penicillins                                     30%                                              50% 
bacteriostatic effect                          bactericidal effect  
>MIC                                                                                  >MIC
                                                    fT       for                                           fT       for 
>MIC
Table 9. Bactericidal and bacteriostatic effect determined by fT        
 
fT>MIC of 40% 
•   For carbapenems the plasma concentration should exceed MIC at least 40% of the time, that is, 
is, fT>MIC of 70% 
•   For cephalosporins the plasma concentration should exceed MIC at least 70% of the time, that 
fT>MIC of 50%.  
•   For penicillins, the plasma concentration should exceed MIC at least 50% of the time, that is, 
concentration exceeds the MIC (e.g., beta lactams) .  
how high is the plasma concentration that is achieved. What matters is how long the plasma 
Such antibiotics are said to exhibit time dependent killing. For such antibiotics it does not matter 
is related to what proportion of the dosing interval the plasma concentration remains above MIC. 
above the MIC does not further increase the rate o f bacterial killing. For such antibiotics, the efficacy 
killing occurs at a relatively same rate. Increasing the plasma concentration of the antibiotic over and 
 For some antibiotics, once the concentration of the antibiotic in the plasma exceeds MIC, bacterial 
plasma concentration of the antibiotic remains above the MIC  . 
The fT>MIC: fT>MIC refers to the fraction or proportion of the dosing interval during which the 
  
antibiotics are called said to exhibit concentration dependent killing.   (e.g., aminoglycosides)  
of bacterial killing. That is, higher the Cmax/MIC ratio, higher is the rate of bacterial killing. Such 
The Cmax/MIC ratio: For some antibiotics higher the peak concentration achieved, faster is the rate 
 
which the plasma concentration is above MIC. 
max                            >MIC 
by a gradual fall. C  refers to the peak plasma concentration. fTrefers to the time during 
Figure 3: The plasma concentration of the orally administered antibiotic shows a rapid raise followed 
 
Time
   MIC
f T
Plasma
MIC
  C
Concentration
ma 
C
 
----------------Page (24) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
18 | Page  
above MIC is a disadvantage; this can be overcome by giving the first dose as a 30-minute infusion 
some time before the plasma concentration exceeds MIC. This lag in achieving a concentration 
If an extended infusion is given the plasma concentration of the antibiotic rises slowly and it takes 
  
So extended infusion of antibiotics is particularly important with relatively resistant organisms. 
 
 
fT>MIC of at least 50% is possible only with extended infusion 
MIC is 1mcg/ml: Here conventional infusion achieves fT>MIC of less than 50%; achieving a target 
 
MIC is 0.5mcg/ml: Here conventional infusion itself achieves fT>MIC of more than 50%.  
 
Figure 4: MIC is 0.5: Here even conventional infusion achieves fT>MIC of over 50% 
50            of dosing interval                                                                                      Dosing interval
Penicillin Concentration 
GNB MIC                     2          0  . 5     mcg         / ml
GNB MIC                     1          1     mcg        / ml
Extended Infusion
(
mcg
Short Infusion
/
ml
)
Look at two situations:  
 
Note that extended infusion achieves longer fT>MIC.  
achieved, thus increasing the efficacy of the antibiotic. 
concentration remains above MIC for a much longer period. In other words, a higher fT>MIC is 
delayed and lower peak, and the rate of elimination occurs at a much lower rate. So, the drug 
over 30 minutes. When the same drug is given as an extended infusion over 4 hours, it achieves a 
E tended infusion and continuous infusion: Conventionally the antibiotic is given as a short infusion 
  
quinolones) 
concentration curve that is above MIC. They are said to exhibit AUC/MIC dependent killing (e.g., 
AUC/MIC: For some antibiotics the rate of killing best correlates with the area of the drug 
  
Much higher f>MIC is needed in immunocompromised individuals. 
fT>MIC is sufficient for bacteriostatic effects and higher fT>MIC is necessary for bactericidal effect. 
contrast, carbapenems have significant post antibiotic effect and so require a lower fT>MIC. Lower 
Penicillins and cephalosporins have poor post antibiotic effect and require higher fT>MIC. In 
 
----------------Page (25) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
19 | Page  
                                                           
 
administered through the same IV line should be verified. 
exceed 3 hours.  In a patient on continuous infusion of an antibiotic, compatibility of other drugs 
temperature for long durations. So, the duration of infusion of imipenem or meropenem should not 
exceed this limit. Some beta-lactam agents, such as carbapenems, are not stable at room 
time from the preparation of the diluted solution to the completion of the infusion should not 
and the concentration achieved as well as the room temperature at which it is stored or infused. The 
duration of stability of the antibiotic depends on the fluid chosen for dilution, the volume of dilution 
Problems with continuous infusions: The antibiotic should be dissolved in a compatible IV fluid. The 
 
simulated as a 3–4 h infusion compared with a standard 0.5 h infusion. 
improvement in CFR (case fatality rate) for cephalosporins and carbapenems when the same dose is 
Mortality benefit with prolonged infusions: Most simulation studies demonstrate a 5–20% 
 
time above MIC (Adapted from Antimicrobial stewardship Edited by Matthew Laundy). 
Figure 5: The above diagram shows that extended infusion and continuous infusion lead to longer 
 ours
0                                       2                                       4                                       6                                       8                                     10
0
MIC
20
Concentration 
40
60
Continuous Infusion
(
mg
Prolonged Infusion
80
/
L
Traditional bolus dose
)
100
120
 
who have severe or critical illness. 
and subsequent doses may be given as extended infusion. This is particularly important in patients 
 
----------------Page (26) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
20 | Page  
 
 
@ 4°C: > 24 hours  
@ 25°C: 24 hours 
@ 37°C: 8 hours        infusion                                                          hour infusion   
Cefepime                     2 g IV Q8H given as 30-minute                   Same dose given as 3-to-4-          
infusion                                                          infusion 
Imipenem                    500mg to 1 g IV Q6H as 30-minute          Same dose given as 3-hour           
@ 4°C: 24 hours 
@ 25°C: 4 hours 
@ 37°C: < 4 hours                                                                             infusion 
Meropenem               1 to 2 g IV Q8H as 30-minute infusion     Same dose given as 3-hour           
Given as a 30 min infusion                          Cefoperazone) 
Acinetobacter infections)                           higher doses of 
per day have been used for                       2:1 ratio is preferable with 
Sulbactam 2 to 4 g per day (up to 12 g    the ratio of 1:1 or 2:1;  
                                                                         (Cefoperazone sulbactam in       infusion 
16 g per day have been used)                                                                            a 24 h 
relatively resistant pathogens; up to        4h                                                    be given as 
sulbactam                  (increase to 6 to 8 g per day for                be given as an infusion over       dose may 
Cefoperazone            Cefoperazone dose is 2 to 4 g per day     Cefoperazone sulbactam may    Total daily 
@ 4°C: No data 
@ 25°C: 24 hours 
@ 37°C: 24 hours 
tazobactam                                                                                        infusion 
Piperacillin                 3.75 g to 4.5 g q 6h as 30 min infusion     Same dose given as 4-hour           
Sanford)
                                Traditional dosing                                 Extended dosing                   infusion 
(Stability data from 
Continuous 
infusion solution 
stability of the 
Antibiotic and 
Table 10. Extended and continuous infusion regimen for Beta lactam antibiotics 
 
----------------Page (27) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
21 | Page  
 
dialysis in case of many drugs.  
supplementation dose should be given after each 
patients on haemodialysis, post-dialysis 
clearance is less than 30ml). In addition, for 
reduced from 15 mg/kg to 7.5 mg/ kg if creatinine 
aminoglycosides (e.g. the first dose of amikacin 
reduced only in case of some drugs such as 
creatinine clearance; The first dose itself should be 
the suspected source (eg. urine, sputum, pus etc.)        the maintenance dose needs to be reduced as per 
Other cultures: Other relevant cultures based on first dose of antibiotic should be the full dose; only 
this is called 1 set of blood culture)                                Important: In patients with renal impairment, the 
aerobic bottle and 10 ml in the anaerobic bottle; the obese.                                                                             Add vancomycin when MRSA is likely. 
sent, draw 20 ml for each sample. Put 10 ml in the renal or liver function. Ensure adequate dosing in suspected. 
(If both aerobic and anaerobic cultures are to be Ensure appropriate dose modification based on Add clindamycin when toxic shock syndrome is 
each sample and put in the aerobic bottle.                      @page 11)                                                                               may be used instead of BL/BLI combination 
If only aerobic cultures are sent, draw 10 ml for on several factors (see Right Drug and Right Dose  carbapenems.  In such situations, carbapenem 
antibiotic, highly resistant organisms suspected)         The choice of antibiotic as empiric therapy depends cefoperazone/sulbactam may be inferior to 
infective endocarditis, patient already received allergy)                                                                                     such as piperacillin/tazobactam or 
Take 3 or 4 samples in special situations (suspected questionable except in case of known penicillin ESBL producing pathogens, BL/BLI combinations 
peripheral venipuncture.                                                     drawn; the role of test dose for antibiotics is For severe, life-threatening infections caused by 
through the central line and one through  drawn (compete test dose while cultures are being of ESBL production.  
If the patient has a central line, take one sample be administered once blood cultures have been Ceftriaxone resistance should be taken as evidence 
venipunctures.                                                                    Keep the antibiotic ready, so that the antibiotic may narrowest spectrum antibiotic as early as possible. 
culture, preferably through two different  within 1 hour of presentation.                                             reports and clinical response.  De-escalate to the 
antibiotics. Take at least 2 samples for blood  antimicrobials as soon as possible, preferably deescalate or escalate as required as per culture 
Blood culture: Take blood cultures before initiating Patients should receive the first dose of  Review the situation after 48 to 72 hours and 
1. Obtain appropriate cultures                                           2. Ensure early and appropriate antibiotic therapy       3. Timely review of antibiotic therapy 
V.  Sepsis – General Principles 
 
----------------Page (28) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
22 | Page  
 
GNB 
treatment of carbapenem resistant 
million units IV Q12H 
● 
See separate document for 
susceptibility 
loading followed by 4.5 
designing the combination therapy 
SYS                                                                                                                                                              depending upon 
OR      Colistin 9 million units IV                                                                                                         this should be considered in 
Another antibiotic 
-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  all carry the risk of nephrotoxicity; 
03                                                                                                       Q12H  
±                                               ± 
@page 77                    ● 
OR                                                                                  Polymyxins, amikacin, vancomycin 
                                                                                                            12,500-15,000 IU/kg IV 
primary antibiotic)               vancomycin dosing        therapy 
IU/kg IV loading followed by 
current or recent carbapenem 
meropenem is the                  Q8H with TDM; see 
acquired)                                                                 OR      Polymyxin B 20,000-25,000                                                                                                     such as ICU acquired infection, 
OD (particularly if                 15 to 20mg/Kg IV 
carbapenem resistant pathogen 
(Hospital 
15 to 20mg/kg IV              MRSA coverage) 
Acinetobacter, etc.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         there are risk factors for 
● 
Septic Shock              Klebsiella, Pseudomonas,               I        Meropenem 1-2g IV Q8H                            Amikacin                            Vancomycin (for            Consider polymyxin or colistin if 
>18 mg/dL). 
Enteric fever 
(>2 mmol/L or  
Leptospirosis 
elevated lactate level 
SYS                                           Scrub typhus 
MAP≥65mm g plus 
Malaria 
-                                                                                                     
02
maintain                                 due to specific pathogens 
±     antibiotic)                    ±      @page 77 
OR      Meropenem 1-2g IV Q8H 
requiring vasopressor to      Systemic febrile illnesses 
 
primary                               vancomycin dosing 
Staphylococcal TSS 
Sepsis with hypotension 
4.5g IV Q6H 
Streptococcal TSS 
BL/BLI is the                       Q8H with TDM; see 
acquired)                    Toxin mediated                                           OR      Piperacillin-tazobactam                                                                                                         
OD (particularly if             15 to 20mg/Kg IV 
antibiotic therapy)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         without (≥40 versus ≥10 percent) 
(Community 
TDS-QID or 3g Q12H                                    15 to 20mg/kg IV              MRSA coverage) 
prolonged broad-spectrum                                                                                                                                                                                                       with shock as compared to those 
Septic Shock               immunocompromised,                    I        Cefoperazone-Sulbactam 2g IV                  Amikacin                            Vancomycin (for 
● 
Mortality is much higher in those 
(Particularly in 
altered mentation, SBP≤100mmHg). 
Candida, others 
consists of 3 components. (RR≥22, 
Fungi 
● 
qSOFA score is used for screening. It 
other streptococci 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    without (≥40 versus ≥10 percent) 
SYS   (see remarks)                         Streptococcus pyogenes, 
with shock as compared to those 
pneumococcus, 
suggests sepsis.                                                                                                                                                                  antibiotic)                           @page 77 
● 
-                                                                                         II       Meropenem 1-2g IV Q8H                                                                                                                   Mortality is much higher in those 
01                                             Staphylococcus aureus, 
±                                               ± 
A qSOFA score≥2 
primary                               vancomycin dosing        points from baseline. 
Gram positive bacteria 
          
IV TDS-QID or 3g IV Q12H 
increase in SOFA score by 2 or more 
Pseudomonas (usually HCAI)                                                                                                                    BL/BLI is the                       Q8H with TDM; see 
● 
acquired)                                                                 OR      Cefoperazone-Sulbactam 2g                                                                                                   Organ dysfunction is represented by 
Acinetobacter, 
OD (particularly if             15 to 20mg/Kg IV 
(community acquired) 
infection.  
(Community 
4.5g IV Q6H                                                   15 to 20mg/kg IV              MRSA coverage) 
E. coli, Klebsiella                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            organ dysfunction resulting from 
● 
Sepsis                          Gram negative bacteria                 I        Piperacillin-tazobactam                              Amikacin                            Vancomycin (for            Sepsis is defined as life threatening 
#     Clin. Diagnosis           Etiology                                          Empirical Antibiotic Therapy                                               Remarks 
Sepsis – Empirical Therapy 
 
----------------Page (29) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
23 | Page  
 
 
Definitive therapy: Therapy guided by culture and sensitivity reports. 
Empiric therapy: Initial therapy before culture results are available. 
should not be used as monotherapy for bacteraemic illness.                                                  
susceptible (e.g., quinolone, cotrimoxazole). However, aminoglycosides    
such situations, a non-beta lactam drug may be used if the bacteria is   initial 3 to 5 days. (no definite evidence for this practice) 
be inferior to carbapenems, particularly in patients with septic shock. In    ●  Some treat bacteraemia in neutropenic patients with a second agent for 
●  Severe or life-threatening infection with ESBL producing bacteria BL/BLI may     synergism. 
quinolone, cotrimoxazole)                                                                                                           each of which are not effective may be combined for obtaining 
bioavailability is available to which the pathogen is susceptible (e.g.,      ●  Highly resistant strain for which no effective drug is available: two drugs 
afebrile for 48 hours, provided an effective oral drug with excellent definite evidence for this practice) 
●  Oral switch is safe once the patient has responded and has remained  to prevent emergence of resistance a second agent may be added (no 
infection)                                                                                                                                   ●  Highly resistant strain which is only susceptible to one drug (e.g. colistin):  
major immunocompromising condition, no endovascular, bone, joint, or CNS drugs from two different classes. 
responds promptly in 48 to 72 hours, no uncontrolled source of infection, no ●  Endocarditis due to Pseudomonas should be treated with two effective 
●  A 7-day duration of therapy is adequate for uncomplicated infection (patient situations. 
illness.                                                                                                                                  ●  Combination therapy for Pseudomonas infections is indicated in only a few 
aminoglycosides should not be used as monotherapy for bacteraemic     
●  Only a single agent therapy is indicated for definitive therapy. However, situations. However, aminoglycosides should never be used as monotherapy.  
to add a second drug, particularly in those with sepsis or septic shock.                 ●  For definitive therapy only a single drug is indicated except in a few 
the probability of resistance to the selected agent is > 10 to 20%, it is better that the regimen contains at least one active drug). 
●  For empiric therapy only a single agent therapy is indicated. However, when ●  For empirical therapy generally combination therapy is indicated (to ensure 
                                                                                                                                                     
Enterobacteriaceae bacteremia                                                                                          Pseudomonas bacteremia  
                                                                                                                                                     
VI. B CTER EMI   - Principles of antibiotic therapy for Gram-negative bacilli bacteraemia 
 
----------------Page (30) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
24 | Page  
 
aureus infection infective endocarditis should be ruled out. 
sensitivity (<5 percent) for CRBSI but has high specificity (94 to 99 percent) 
●                                                                                                                                                                                                                      intravascular prosthetic devices (e.g, vascular grafts). In addition, for Staph 
Presence of inflammation or purulence at the exit site has very low 
●                                                                                                                                                                                                                      culture, no symptoms or signs of metastatic infection, no other indwelling 
If exit site is red, painful, or discharging pus then take swabs for culture 
after initial positive culture, defervescence within 72 hours of initial positive 
Exit site infection 
five days of diagnosis: negative follow-up blood cultures within 24 to 72 hours 
 
Uncomplicated CRBSI should meet all the following: catheter removed within 
avoid blood culture contamination  
Complicated vs uncomplicated CRBSI: 
0.5%); avoid povidone-iodine; allow adequate contact and drying times to 
●                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        site. 
Use of either alcohol or tincture of iodine or alcoholic chlorhexidine (> 
risks associated with removal and replacement of a catheter at another 
culture  
must be weighed against the clinical indication for the catheter and the 
Prepare the skin/clean the catheter hub, before drawing sample for blood 
● 
Catheter removal based on the above pathogen-related considerations 
 
whom catheter removal is not readily feasible. 
Staphylococcus aureus and common Gram-negative pathogens.  
preferred; however, catheter salvage may be attempted in patients for 
haematology patients. It has been shown to perform poorly for 
● 
In patients with CRBSI due to Enterococcus spp, catheter removal is 
hours has been evaluated primarily the setting of febrile neutropenia in 
(e.g., Escherichia coli, Klebsiella species, Enterobacter species).  
2 hours with earlier growth occurring in the CVC sample). DTP of > two 
setting of CRBSI due to CoNS and drug-susceptible Enterobacteriaceae 
culture detection systems (DTP, differential time to positivity of more than 
● 
In the absence of complications, catheter salvage is reasonable in the 
prior to growth in the peripheral vein sample using automated blood 
●                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        resistant gram-negative bacilli, Candida spp. 
CRBSI is confirmed if microbial growth occurs in the CVC sample at least 2h 
● 
Infection with the following pathogens: S. aureus, P. aeruginosa, drug-
catheter lumens. 
2. Pathogen related factors  
recommended that 2 blood samples should be drawn through different 
●                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
If a blood sample cannot be drawn from a peripheral vein, it is 
appropriate antimicrobial therapy 
sample.  
●                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        presence of a propagating clot, persistent bacteraemia after 72 hours of 
Ensure proper cleaning of the skin and catheter hub before taking the 
metastatic infection, presence of suppurative thrombophlebitis, 
bottles clearly as central and peripheral. 
instability, presence of concomitant endocarditis or evidence of 
samples should be taken within 15 minutes of each other. Mark the 
● 
Sepsis (organ dysfunction resulting from infection), hemodynamic 
central venous catheter (CVC) and one from a peripheral vein. The two 
●                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1. CRBSI related complications 
For the diagnosis of CRBSI, take a two blood cultures, one through the 
Indications for removing the catheter (any of the following): 
Diagnosis of CRBSI (Catheter related blood stream infection):                                    Catheter removal: 
                                                                                                                                                      
VII.   CRBSI – General Principles to Patients with CRBSI 
 
----------------Page (31) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
25 | Page  
 
ALT refers to antibiotic lock therapy 
Note: Catheter removal is recommended in case of Staph. aureus, Pseudomonas, drug resistant GNB, Candida and preferred in case of Enterococcus.  
continue until ANC > 500                                                                                         continue until ANC > 500 
daily or on alternate days till negative); in neutropenic patients                   daily or on alternate days till negative); in neutropenic patients 
Candida              At least 14 days after blood cultures become negative (repeat cultures      At least 14 days after blood cultures become negative (repeat cultures 
within 48 hours)                                                                                                        within 48 hours) 
(Monotherapy is sufficient for directed therapy if bacteremia clears            (Monotherapy is sufficient for directed therapy if bacteraemia clears 
GNB                    7 to 14 days                                                                                                                14 days with ALT 
Enterococcus    7 to 14 days                                                                                                                14 days with ALT 
Staph aureus     14 days; ≥ 7 days in children                                                                                   28 days with ALT  
hours of therapy; otherwise extend therapy to 4 to 6 weeks 
infected) - 14 days                                                                                                     onset of symptoms of bacteraemia and bacteraemia clears within 48 
Endovascular implant or orthopaedic hardware present (but not                  infected):  14 to 21 days with ALT, if antibiotic started within 48 h of 
                                                                                                                                      Endovascular implant or orthopaedic hardware present (but not 
orthopaedic hardware not present - 5 to 7 days.                                                10 to 14 days with ALT 
CoNS                   Endovascular implant or                                                                                          Endovascular implant or orthopaedic hardware not present:  
                                                            Catheter Removed                                                                            Catheter not removed 
CRBSI – Duration of Therapy (for uncomplicated bacteraemia: see definition above) 
 
last 48h.
                               maltophilia, Candida
 
or has been removed within 
Stenotrophomonas                                       (if the patient is critically ill) 
SYS
onset, catheter still present                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Acinetobacter,                                  OR       Meropenem 1-2g IV Q8H 
placement. At symptom                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               of carbapenem resistant GNB 
-                                                        Enterobacter, 
04                                                                                                                TDS-QID or 3g Q12H 
±                                                                             ●  See separate document for treatment 
hours after catheter 
Pseudomonas, 
 
OR       Cefoperazone-Sulbactam 2g IV                                                                                  table below. 
Symptom onset at least 48                                                                                                                                                               see vancomycin dosing @page 77 
E. Coli, Klebsiella, 
up to 4 to 6 weeks. See CRBSI duration 
Fever, chills or hypotension. 
CoNS, Enterococcus,                                                                                                                  15 to 20mg/Kg IV Q8H with TDM;        up to 14 days and complicated CRBSI is 
● 
CRBSI                                Staphylococcus aureus,          I      Piperacillin-tazobactam 4.5g IV Q6H                 Vancomycin (for MRSA coverage)        Treatment of uncomplicated CRBSI is 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
#     Clinical Diagnosis            Etiology                                      Empirical Antibiotic Therapy                                           Remarks
CRBSI – Empirical Therapy 
 
----------------Page (32) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
26 | Page  
 
shy to talk about them. 
infections are often missed as patients may be too 
information. Perianal, testicular or scrotal                                                                                                                          
Leave no cloth unturned! 
or abscesses may not always volunteer the                                                                                                                        fever or leptospirosis. 
hidden in the breast, axilla, groin or genital region. 
with skin or soft tissue infections such as furuncles                                                                                                          There are no good rapid diagnostic tests for enteric 
examination is always essential. The eschar is often 
Potential clues that are easily missed: Patients                                                                                                                available and has good sensitivity and specificity. 
clinician. Specific questioning and thorough 
pneumonia.                                                                                                                                                                               Note: RDT for scrub typhus has become recently 
if they are aware, they do not report it to the 
should not lead to a mistaken diagnosis of RTI or                                                                                                               
Patients with eschar are often unaware of it; even 
often seen in systemic febrile infections. That                                                                                                                   enteric fever, malaria or dengue.   
hepatomegaly on physical examination 
(RTI). Cough developing after a few days of fever is                                                                                                          commonly leptospirosis. It is not a feature of 
lymphadenopathy, eschar, rash, splenomegaly. 
onset of fever indicate respiratory tract infection                                                                                                             also strongly suggests scrub typhus or less 
Physical examination:  Specifically look for 
symptoms, cough, or throat discomfort at the                                                                                                                   search for eschar is necessary.  Lymphadenopathy 
splenic abscess, etc.) 
systemic febrile illness rather than AGE. Nasal                                                                                                                   virtually diagnostic of scrub typhus; a careful 
may not always be obvious. (Liver abscess, 
stools occurring after a few days of fever suggests                                                                                                           diagnosing enteric fever.  Presence of eschar is 
seated abscess localizing signs and symptoms 
abdominal pain or tenesmus suggests AGE. Loose                                                                                                            giving any antibiotic is extremely important for 
•   Deep seated abscess: Also note that in deep 
stools from the onset of fever, often with vomiting,                                                                                                         not possible. Obtaining a blood culture before 
essential for correct diagnosis. Prominent loose                   implanted electrical device (CIED)                                 For the other three, immediate specific diagnosis is 
History: Careful analysis of the symptoms is                          heart disease or prosthetic valve or cardiac               antigen are of great value.  
cough may develop only after several days.                           endocarditis in those with underlying valvular           testing by RDT or ELISA and RDT for malarial 
upper respiratory symptoms may not occur, and            •   Infective endocarditis: Always consider infective      Out of the 5 common causes for AUFI, dengue NS1 
diagnosis. Covid commonly presents with fever;                   lifesaving.                                                                           Specific diagnosis: 
Of course, Covid 19 is an important differential                    withdrawal of the offending drug may be                   commonly with malaria. 
fever, and Leptospirosis.                                                             allopurinol etc.). Early identification and                     thrombocytopenia is seen with dengue and less 
India are: Scrub typhus, Dengue, Malaria, Enteric                 drug recently (e.g., phenytoin, dapsone,                     Thrombocytopenia can occur with all five; severe 
undifferentiated febrile illness in most regions of                 especially if the patient has been started on the       with bowel perforation.   
The five most common causes for acute                           •   Drug fever: Always keep drug fever in mind               normal or low but leukocytosis may occur in those 
Undifferentiated febrile Illness - AUFI)                    Special points:                                                                        unlikely. In enteric fever, the WBC count is either 
●  fever without localizing features (Acute                  thorough examination is always essential.                        leptospirosis but makes malaria and dengue 
●  fever with localizing features and                             skin rash or eschar. Specific questioning and                   Leukocytosis may be seen in scrub typhus and 
Acute Febrile illness may be divided into                          Patients also may not always volunteer regarding          Laboratory examination: 
VIII.   cute  ndifferentiated Febrile Illness – General Principles 
 
----------------Page (33) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
27 | Page  
 
situations)                                                                                            routine etc. also). 
before empirical therapy (except in very resource poor              basic tests such as complete blood count, urine 
Obtain blood culture and other cultures as indicated,               extremely important if there is septic shock. (Obtain       to the above regimen.  
For severe or complicated enteric fever, ceftriaxone is the drug of choice.  
empirical therapy as early as possible. This is                     doxycycline or azithromycin should be added 
Azithromycin covers all three  
Ceftriaxone covers enteric fever and leptospirosis  
cultures such as urine  etc., as appropriate) and start       If scrub typhus is a consideration, then 
Doxycycline covers scrub and leptospirosis  
obtain appropriate cultures (blood culture, other             ceftriaxone is the drug of choice.  
Dengue does not require specific therapy   
Malaria requires specific therapy; decide on the basis of smear and antigen testing  
sepsis: If there are features of sepsis any time,                 For severe or complicated enteric fever, 
 
Empirical therapy in AUFI patients with features of       septic shock)  
Consider empirical therapy after 4 to 7 days.  
                                                                                                    Meropenem (especially for patients with 
smear for malaria. 
azithromycin.                                                                            
Dengue NS1 antigen testing, malarial antigen, peripheral 
ceftriaxone should be given with doxycycline or              coverage)  
Consider further testing. 
azithromycin is preferred. For sick patients,                      be added for additional gram -negative 
On day 3 to 5, consider CBC, urine routine. 
For stable patients, monotherapy with doxy or                Cefoperazone sulbactam (amikacin may also 
If there are no features of sepsis, wait for 2 to 4 days. 
Empirical therapy in AUFI patients:                                    coverage) 
 
                                                                                                    be added for additional gram -negative 
clinical and laboratory features and keep an open mind. 
leptospirosis but does not cover scrub typhus.                 Piperacillin tazobactam (amikacin may also 
be due to another cause. So always correlate with the 
This is the choice for severe enteric fever or                      
infection with dengue and the current febrile illness may 
Empirical ceftriaxone                                                             negative bacilli.  
with AUFI, a positive dengue IgM may represent recent 
Also, higher dose is need in enteric fever.                          may be used to cover adequately for gram 
up to 3 months after dengue infection. So, in a patient 
taking several days and sometimes there is failure.         diagnosis, then one the following regimens 
It should be noted that dengue IgM may remain positive 
But in enteric fever the response is often slow,                of infection is also in the differential 
  
in 24 to 48 hours. Leptospirosis will also respond.           If urinary or intra-abdominal or pelvic source 
80% by day 5 and nearly 100 % by day 10. 
In scrub typhus, usually there is a dramatic response      azithromycin is preferable.   
are detectable in 50% of patients by days 3-5 after onset of illness, increasing to 
Dengue IgM antibody becomes detectable only after 3 to 5 days. IgM antibodies        Empirical azithromycin                                                          differential, then ceftriaxone with 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  If community acquired pneumonia is also a 
specificity of NS1 antigen test is 95 to 100%.                               But enteric fever will not respond.                                      leptospirosis is suspected.   
about 60%. NS1 is generally negative after 7 to 9 days. The     in 24 to 48 hours. Leptospirosis will also respond.           if one of enteric fever, scrub typhus or 
but falls gradually thereafter; by day 5 the sensitivity is            In scrub typhus, usually there is a dramatic response      ceftriaxone with doxycycline or azithromycin 
Sensitivity of dengue NS1antigen is nearly 100% on day 1        Empirical doxycycline                                                            Malaria requires specific therapy. Start 
Diagnosis of dengue:                                                                        Options for empiric therapy:                                                Dengue requires only supportive therapy. 
 cute  ndifferentiated Febrile Illness – General Principles to   FI (continued) 
 
----------------Page (34) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
28 | Page  
 
ceftriaxone 
SYS
have to used instead of 
-
0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            cefoperazone/sulbactam will 
6
 
piperacillin/tazobactam or 
therapy 
Malaria requires specific                                                                                                                                                                            spectrum antibiotic such as 
 
consideration, broad 
Azithromycin 500mg IV/PO OD OR Doxy 100mg IV/PO BD 
/ organ dysfunction             supportive therapy only. 
such as UTI etc. are in 
 
Dengue requires 
With features of sepsis 
definite and other conditions 
PLUS 
 
Febrile Illness (AUFI)-                                                                                                                                                                            or leptospirosis is not 
fever and Leptospirosis.                  
Acute Undifferentiated      Scrub typhus, Enteric              I       Ceftriaxone 2g IV OD                                                                                                        If diagnosis of scrub, enteric 
SYS
therapy 
-                                                             Malaria requires specific 
0
5                                                             
 
Azithromycin 1g PO OD x 5d (for Enteric). 
supportive therapy only. 
dysfunction 
Dengue requires                                          
sepsis / organ                       Non-bacterial:                                             (Single dose therapy has been effective in some studies). 
                                                           OR      Azithromycin 500mg PO OD for 3-5d (for Scrub and Leptospirosis) 
Without features of 
fever and Leptospirosis. 
Febrile Illness (AUFI)- 
Scrub typhus, Enteric 
Acute Undifferentiated       Bacteria:                                   I       Doxycycline 100mg PO BD for 5-7d (covers Scrub and Leptospirosis)                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
#       Clinical Diagnosis            Aetiology                                   Empirical Antibiotic Therapy                                          Remarks
 cute  ndifferentiated Febrile Illness – Empirical Therapy 
 
----------------Page (35) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
29 | Page  
 
x next 6d 
SYS
OR       Azithromycin 500mg IV/PO OD on day 1 f/b 250mg PO/IV OD 
-
0
9
                                                                                                          OR       Doxycycline 200mg IV/PO STAT f/b 100mg BD x 7d 
Moderate to Severe 
OR       Ceftriaxone 2g IV OD x 7d 
Leptospirosis 
AFI - Suspected                                                                 I         Penicillin G 20MU IV Q6H x 7d                                                                            
seven days 
● 
Duration of therapy in severe leptospirosis is 
children of all ages 
SYS
● 
Doxycycline may be used for ≤21 days in 
-                                                                                                                                                                                                                              susceptibility to carbapenems as well.  
0       Mild  
9                                                                                                        OR      Amoxicillin 500mg PO TID x 7d                                                                 In vitro evidence shows excellent 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                     aminoglycosides, macrolides, tetracyclines. 
OR      Azithromycin 500mg PO OD x 3d                                                             including penicillins, cephalosporins, 
Leptospirosis 
susceptible to a broad range of antibiotics, 
● 
AFI - Suspected                                                                 I         Doxy 100mg PO BD x 7d                                                                                        Leptospires are highly 
SYS
        OR      Doxycycline 100mg IV/PO BD x 5-7d 
-
0          Typhus 
8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                children of all ages 
 
                                                                                                                           ● 
AFI - Suspected Scrub                                                                Azithromycin 500mg IV/PO OD x 3-5d                                                               Doxycycline may be used for ≤21 days in 
OR      Cotrimoxazole DS 1 tab BD x 7-14d 
most strains have become sensitive now. 
 
SYS
14 days may be used after AST report as 
OR      Amoxicillin 1g PO TID or 2g IV Q6H x 14d 
later
 
days OR Cotrimoxazole DS 1 tab BD for 7 to 
-
increases to become high days 
0                                                                                                                 and failure rates may be higher as compared to azithromycin)     ● 
                                                                                                                              Amoxicillin 1 g PO TID or 2 g IV Q6H for 14 
7
grade fever gradually 
                                                                                                          OR      Cefixime 400mg PO OD x 14d (defervescence may be slower           India.  
characteristic: initial low-                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●  Ciprofloxacin resistance is very common in 
enteric fever) 
Step ladder fever is                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    with appropriate therapy. 
OR      Ceftriaxone 2g IV BD for 10 x 14d (the choice for severe 
● 
Defervescence may take several days even 
Fever 
Salmonella paratyphi                   PO OD x 5d (for mild to moderate disease)                                                       severe enteric fever.  
● 
AFI - Suspected Enteric    Salmonella typhi,                          Azithromycin 1g PO on day 1 f/b 500mg PO OD for next 6 days OR 1g       Ceftriaxone is the preferred antibiotic for 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                
#       Clinical Diagnosis          Etiology      Empirical Antibiotic Therapy                                          Remarks
 cute  ndifferentiated Febrile Illness – Empirical Therapy (continued) 
 
----------------Page (36) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
30 | Page  
Chronic liver disease 
Immunocompromised patients (including asplenia)  
Pneumonia leading to neutropenia 
Severe CAP                                                                                      not be used for pneumococcal coverage. 
Indications for blood culture in CAP                                            pneumococcal resistance to ciprofloxacin, and it should 
Blood culture is not indicated in all patients with CAP            penicillin allergic patients. There is increasing 
Blood culture                                                                                  them for their anti TB effect. They may have a role in 
                                                                                                           therapy.  But it is better to avoid them and reserve 
                                                                                                           pneumonia pathogens and may be used for empirical 
Covid 19                                                                                           moxifloxacin) cover pneumococcus and atypical 
Influenza                                                                                          Respiratory fluoroquinolones (levofloxacin and 
Viral pathogens                                                                                
                                                                                                           is suspected                                                                                     tazobactam  
Klebsiella pneumonia                                                                    amoxicillin if staphylococcus or Haemophilus influenza         cefoperazone sulbactam as compared to piperacillin 
Staphylococcus aureus                                                                 Consider amoxicillin/clavulanic acid instead of                        JIPMER the susceptibility rates are slightly higher for 
Legionella pneumoniae                                                                                                                                                                           piperacillin for Pseudomonas coverage. However, at 
Haemophilus influenza                                                                 may occur                                                                                        Cefoperazone sulbactam is similar but inferior to 
Less common bacterial pathogens                                            infection with staphylococcus or haemophilus influenza         
                                                                                                           Following influenza virus infection, secondary bacterial        MRSA. It has excellent anaerobic coverage as well.   
Mycoplasma pneumoniae                                                                                                                                                                       Pseudomonas. It covers MSSA well but does not cover 
Chlamydia pneumoniae                                                                should be used to guide the decision.                                       ill patients. Piperacillin tazobactam covers 
Pneumococcus                                                                               the preferred options in India. Locally relevant data              carbapenem may be the choice particularly in seriously 
Common bacterial pathogens                                                    doxycycline resistance is over 25% in India and are not         effective against ESBL producing Klebsiella but a 
                                                                                                           overall macrolide resistance is over 50% and                           pneumonia if resistant pathogens are considered. It is 
confirmed or ruled out                                                                 pneumonia pathogens and pneumococcus.  However,          Piperacillin tazobactam is a good choice for severe 
admitted to an isolation ward/ICU till diagnosis is                  A macrolide or doxycycline will cover atypical                           
PPE should be worn by HCP. They should preferably be        choice in some regions of the world.                                          reasonably.  
always be evaluated in an isolation unit. Appropriate            A macrolide or doxycycline may be used as the first               Klebsiella. It also covers MSSA and anaerobic bacteria 
Patients suspected to have Covid infection should                                                                                                                            against Klebsiella but not against ESBL producing 
                                                                                                           (1g tid) is still effective.                                                                 effective against Haemophilus influenza. It is effective 
taste is characteristic but uncommon                                         tid) may be inadequate; however high dose amoxicillin        Ceftriaxone is effective against pneumococcus. It is 
respiratory symptoms or diarrhoea. Loss of smell or              India and oral therapy with low dose amoxicillin (500mg        
patients with fever, malaise, headache with or without        penicillin resistance among pneumococci is increasing in      used 
Covid-19 infection should always be considered in                 Amoxicillin is the preferred drug in India. Low level                Beta lactam PLUS macrolide combination should be 
Covid 19 infection                                                                         CAP managed as outpatient                                                       CAP management in Hospitalized patients 
IX. Respiratory Infections – Community  cquired Pneumonia 
 
----------------Page (37) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
31 | Page  
 
                                                                                              Pseudomonas. 
                                                                                              The last is a risk factor for CAP due to 
                                                                                               
meningitis or endocarditis)                                              Severe COPD or bronchiectasis  
extrapulmonary infection is identified (eg,                   Gastric acid suppression  
pneumonia, empyema, or lung abscess, or if               Tube feeding  
patients with any of the following: necrotizing            Non-ambulatory status  
Longer duration may be warranted in selected           Immunosuppression  
                                                                                              Use of antibiotics in the previous 90 days                   Severe pneumonia during summer months 
48 to 72 hours should be re-evaluated.                         Hospitalization in the previous 90 days                       Young, previously healthy patient 
Patients who have not responded to therapy after    and MRSA in CAP                                                             Skin pustules 
                                                                                              Risk Factors for MDR gram negative bacteria           Erythematous rash 
patient is doing well otherwise                                                                                                                                   Neutropenia 
There is NO need to extend the antibiotics if the        organism should be discontinued                                 Concurrent influenza 
to 6 weeks to resolve                                                        If MRSA is not isolated, coverage for this                    Gross hemoptysis (not just blood-streaked sputum) 
Cough and chest X ray abnormalities may take 4                                                                                                    Rapidly increasing pleural effusion 
                                                                                              following 2 tables)                                                           Cavitary infiltrate or necrosis 
Altered mental status.                                                      be indicated in other patients as well (see the           MRSA Pneumonia 
O2 sat < 90                                                                          an alternative. Empirical coverage for MRSA may     Clinical Features Suggesting Community Acquired 
RR > 24                                                                                 be given). Linezolid (600 mg IV every 12 hours) is       
BP < 90                                                                                 patients, a loading dose of 25 to 35 mg/kg may        coverage.  
HR > 100                                                                              mcg/mL and for renal function; in seriously ill           pneumonia-specific risk factor may warrant MRSA 
Has no more than one of the following                         hours, adjusted to a trough level of 15 to 20              haemodialysis, or heart failure) and another 
AND                                                                                      addition of vancomycin (15 mg/kg IV every 12          MRSA infection or colonization, long-term 
Afebrile for 48 to 72 hours                                               patients,  treatment for MRSA coverage with the     MRSA-specific risk factor (prior 
Indications for stopping antibiotic.                               failure requiring mechanical ventilation. In such       However, MRSA is an exception: the presence of one 
                                                                                              CAP patients with septic shock or respiratory             
criteria for stopping the antibiotic                                  Empiric therapy for MRSA should be given to            factors are present. 
5 to 7 days; but may be shorter if they fulfil                                                                                                             significantly increased unless three or more risk 
Duration of therapy                                                          Indications for MRSA coverage                                    The incidence of MDR pathogens generally is not 
Respiratory Infections – C P (continued) 
 
----------------Page (38) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
32 | Page  
piperacillin) 
very common 
(but inferior to 
                                                                                                                                                          Resistance is  
Yes 
7    Pseudomonas  
common 
respond) 
has become very 
organisms will not 
E. coli resistance                            may be inferior to carbapenems                                                                                                           common                very common 
produce ESBL)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
producing 
                              resistant.               Yes, but in severe or life-threatening infections, BL/BLI                                                                                    Resistance is             Resistance is  
(But, ESBL 
(Significant proportion 
intrinsically 
Yes 
6    Klebsiella, E. coli                                               Klebsiella 
very common 
                                                                                                                                          ✓              Resistance is  
5    Staph aureus MRSA 
common 
Modest effect 
                                       ✓                   ✓                   ✓                                                               ✓                   ✓ Resistance is 
4    Staph aureus MSSA 
production 
common 
 
to beta lactamase 
          ✓                   ✓                   ✓                   ✓                                         ✓                   ✓ Resistance is 
R is common due 
3    Haemophilus influenza 
Legionella)  
Chlamydophila, 
                                                                                                                       ✓                   ✓                   ✓ 
(Mycoplasma, 
2    Atypical pathogens 
needed)                                                                                                                                                                                                        common) 
needed)                     needed)                  component                                                                                                                              common                    common                 resistance is 
✓                   ✓                   ✓ 
                                              Yes (high dose          Yes (high dose              amoxicillin                                                                                                                           Resistance is             Resistance is            (Ciprofloxacin 
Yes (high dose of                                                                                                                                                                                                      Yes 
1    Pneumococcus 
or ampicillin    clavulanate    e-sulbactam    tazobactam                                                                                  Moxifloxacin 
ORGANISM                Penicillin                                                                                                                Ceftriaxone      Macrolide      Doxycycline 
                                                                                Amoxicillin      Amoxicillin     Cefoperazon     Piperacillin                                                                                   Levofloxacin 
Respiratory Infections – C P (continued) 
 
----------------Page (39) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
33 | Page  
                                                                           TID-QID or 3g Q12H
 
●  Respiratory viruses 
Cefoperazone-Sulbactam 2g IV, 
 
RES
influenzae  
OR 
● 
●  Haemophilus                                                                                                                                                                                                          BL/BLI may be inferior to carbapenems  
-         
03                                                       other GNB                                                                                                                                                                                                               ESBL producing gram negative pathogens 
(CURB-65≥ 3) 
● 
                                                        ●  Klebsiella pneumonia,                                                                                                                                                                                          In severe or life-threatening infections by 
Oseltamivir 
ICU care                            ●  Legionella                                                                                                                                                                                                                Oseltamivir may be added empirically. 
                                                                                  ± 
● 
Staph. aureus                                                                                                                                                                                                         If influenza pneumonia is suspected, 
Pneumonia requiring 
Q8H/6H                                                                    IV/PO OD x 3-5d 
pneumoniae                                                                                                                                                                                                            Q8-12H)) or linezolid (600mg IV Q12H)  
● 
Community Acquired    ●  Streptococcus                       I       Piperacillin-tazobactam 4.5g IV             AND     Azithromycin 500mg                For MRSA add vancomycin (15 to 20mg/kg 
Oseltamivir  
influenzae                                                                                                                                                                                                              
± 
●  Haemophilus                                                                                                                                                                                                           resistant gram-negative pathogens. 
RES                                                                                                                                                                         present)  
●  Legionella                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ceftriaxone, if there are risk factors for 
(CURB-65 = 2)                                 ●  Respiratory viruses                                                                                                                               Gram -ve pathogen                   cefoperazone sulbactam instead of 
-
02
● 
pneumoniae                                                                                                                                         (if risk factors for MDR             Consider piperacillin-tazobactam or 
 
(non-ICU) 
●  Chlamydophila                                                                                                                                                                                                        Oseltamivir may be added empirically. 
Amikacin 15mg/kg IV OD 
● 
Treated as In -Patient        pneumoniae                                                                                                                                                                                                             If influenza pneumonia is suspected, 
± 
●  Mycoplasma                                                                                                                                                                                                            General Principles. 
Pneumonia 
IV/PO OD x 3 -5d 
pneumoniae                                                                                                                                                                                                             Q8-12H) or linezolid (600mg IV Q12H). See 
● 
Community Acquired     ●  Streptococcus                        I       Ceftriaxone 2g IV OD x 5 -7d                   AND     Azithromycin 500mg                 For MRSA, add vancomycin (15 to 20mg/kg 
 
III      Levofloxacin 750mg PO OD x 5d(alternative)  
infection) 
atter influenza virus 
bacterial infection                         OR     Doxycycline 100mg PO BD x 5d(alternative)    
(especially secondary 
RES
●  Staph. aureus                       II      Azithromycin 500mg PO OD x 3-5d (alternative)                                                
influenzae                                                                                                                                                                                                                amoxicillin. 
-
01
●  Haemophilus                                                                                                                                                                                                          significant and can be overcome by high dose 
OR     Cefdinir 300mg PO BD x 5d  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ● 
(CURB-65 = 0  – 1)                          ●  Respiratory viruses                                                                                                                                                                                                Resistance to oral amoxicillin may be 
pneumoniae                                                                                                                                                                                                           are also likely to be resistant to doxycycline. 
OR     Cefpodoxime 200mg PO BD x 5d  
basis 
●  Chlamydophila                                                                                                                                                                                                       About 80% of tetracycline resistant strains 
Treated on OPD                  pneumoniae                                                                                                                                                                                                            always resistant to azithromycin as well. 
OR     Co-amoxiclav 625 mg or 875 mg TID  
●  Mycoplasma                                                                                                                                                                                                           2018).  Erythromycin resistant strains are 
Pneumonia 
 
pneumoniae                                                                                                                                                                                                            was 35% and to tetracycline was 35% (JIPMER 
● 
Community Acquired     ●  Streptococcus                        I       Amoxicillin 500mg or 1g PO TDS x 5d  (higher dose is preferred)                        Pneumococcal resistance to erythromycin 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
#     Clinical Diagnosis        Aetiology                               Empirical Antibiotic Therapy                                           Remarks
Respiratory Infections – C P – Empiric Therapy 
 
----------------Page (40) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
34 | Page  
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 MRSA bacteraemia, immunocompromise, etc.)  
from a different class.                                                                                                         be indicated in selected patients (lung abscess, empyema, MSSA or 
already receiving an antibiotic when he develops VAP, select an antibiotic             therapy for most patients (IDSA 2016). Longer duration of therapy may 
the patient has already received 3 days of therapy already. If the patient is 
Duration of therapy: Seven days of therapy is as effective as longer 
therapy suggests that the current antibiotics are ineffective, particularly if 
diagnostic threshold in a sample taken while the patient is on antibiotic 
culture before starting or changing antibiotics. Colony counts above the 
 
the diagnostic threshold. So, it is very important to send tracheal aspirate 
Pseudomonas has a 40–50% failure rate, no matter what the regimen.  
✔   Even a single dose of effective antibiotic can reduce colony counts below 
higher efficacy compared to even adjusted dose vancomycin. VAP due to 
should not be based on the results of tracheal aspirate culture alone.                       15 to 20 but there is higher risk of renal impairment. Linezolid has 15 % 
specificity; false positive results are common. So, the decision to treat                     be higher if vancomycin dose is adjusted to a chieve trough levels between 
Tracheal aspirate culture has high sensitivity but only moderate                               rate when treated with standard-dose vancomycin. Success rates may 
aspirate showing ≥106 CFU per ml is considered significant growth.                           pathogens. VAP caused by MRSA is associated with a 40% clinical failure 
associated   tracheitis) rather than VAP. Quantitative culture of tracheal           ✔   Treatment failure is not uncommon in VAP, especially that caused by MDR 
aspirate may represent colonization or VAT (ventilator 
empirical antibiotic therapy to be de-escalated.  
or changing antibiotic for VAP. However, bacteria grown in the tracheal 
high-quality sputum eliminates the need for MDR coverage, allowing 
✔   Tracheal aspirate should be sent for Gram stain and culture before starting 
✔   The absence of an MDR pathogen in the culture of tracheal aspirate or 
(Sensitivity only 46% and specificity only 60%)  
and should not be treated with antibiotics.  
✔   CPIS a score of >6 suggests VAP but has significant limitations:  
/tracheal aspirate in hospitalized patients. They are generally colonizers 
their presence is not specific.                                                                                       ✔   Enterococci and candida are often isolated from the sputum 
✔   The absence of new infiltrates on X ray makes pneumonia unlikely, but 
(fever, leucocytosis, worsening infiltrate, worsening in oxygenation) 
✔   Stable ventilator settings argue against clinically significant pneumonia.                   treatment cultures are not recommended unless there is deterioration 
pneumonia an unlikely cause of fever or pulmonary infiltrates.                                   even though lower airways may be eradicated with treatment. So, post 
✔   The absence of bacteria in the gram-stain of tracheal aspirate makes                 ✔   Tracheal colonization with Staph aureus or Gram negatives may persist 
                                                                                                                                                    
Respiratory Infections - V P and H P – General Principles 
 
----------------Page (41) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
35 | Page  
                                                           
 
II 
         If patient has current or recent carbapenem exposure, follow II under VAP 
vancomycin dosing  
considered). See page  77 for 
20mg/kg Q8-12H) (if MRSA is 
RES
unstable patients)   
Add Vancomycin (15 to 
-                                                                                                                  (preferred in hemodynamically 
05                                                                                                                                                                                   
OR      Meropenem 1-2g IV Q8H 
                                                                                                                                                                                       antibiotic)                                                
Other GNB like E. coli                                Q6H                                                                          or BL/BLI is the primary 
MRSA)                                                         Piperacillin-tazobactam 4.5g IV                           hemodynamically unstable 
VAP)                                                                               OR 
S. aureus (MSSA or                                                                                                                       (particularly if patient is 
pneumonia (but not                                                    or 3g Q12H  
Klebsiella                                                                                                                                        15 to 20mg/kg IV OD 
Cefoperazone -Sulbactam 2g IV TID -QID 
Hospital-acquired             P. aeruginosa                          I                                                                                       AND      Consider amikacin                           
dose @page 77.  
4.5MU IV Q12H                                                      considered).  See vancomycin 
OR      Colistin 9MU LD followed by                               20mg/kg Q8-12H) (if MRSA is 
 
                                                                                              Add Vancomycin (15 to 
 
by 12,500 units/kg Q12h                                                  see  
 
Polymyxin B: 25,000 units/kg LD followed                    susceptibility  
 
carbapenem exposure)                                                     antibiotic depending on local 
RES
II      (If patient has current or recent                        AND      Consider adding a second 
 
-                                                                                                                                                                                     vancomycin dosing  
04                                                                                                               unstable patient                                                                                                                 GNB 
considered). See page   for 
                                                                                                                    preferred in hemodynamically                                                                                         treatment of carbapenem resistant 
20mg/kg Q8-12H) (if MRSA is 
● 
Meropenem 1-2g IV Q8H 
See separate document for 
OR                                                                                        Add Vancomycin (15 to 
 
patient and limited disease)                                  
81.  
 
Other GNB like E. coli                                (Preferred in early VAP, stable                            antibiotic) 
● 
See dose of cefoperazone-sulbactam @page 
MRSA)                                                         Q6H                                                                          or BL/BLI is the primary 
VAP in India .  
S. aureus (MSSA or                         OR      Piperacillin-tazobactam 4.5g IV                           hemodynamically unstable 
● 
Acinetobacter is an important pathogen  in 
Klebsiella                                          stable patient and limited disease).                               (particularly if patient is 
intrinsic effect against  Acinetobacter.  
pneumonia 
P. aeruginosa                                  or 3g Q12H (preferred in early VAP,                               15 to 20mg/kg IV OD                       to piperacillin tazobactam as sulbactam has 
● 
Ventilator associated       Acinetobacter                         I       Cefoperazone -Sulbactam  2g IV, TID-QID         AND      Consider Amikacin                             Cefoperazone /sulbactam may  be preferable 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
#      Clinical Diagnosis           Aetiology                               Empirical Antibiotic Therapy                                              Remarks
Respiratory Infections - V P and H P – Empiric Therapy 
 
----------------Page (42) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
36 | Page  
 
Strongyloides are endemic
 
Endemic infections               M. tuberculosis, NTM and 
immunocompromised 
patients 
Aspergillus, Mucor in 
Immunocompromised         S. aureus, GNB, Nocardia, 
RES
obstruction 
airway obstruction 
-
07      Secondary to airway            Usually, S. aureus and GNB in             As per primary source / pathogen 
Septic pulmonary embolism  
                                                                                                                                                                  @page 77. 
embolism                                                                                                 Q8H 
F. necrophorum (Lemierre) in 
Septic pulmonary                                                                         OR     Meropenem 1g IV                      See vancomycin dose S. aureus (IE) and                                                          
MRSA is considered) . 
 
Secondary
        4.5g IV Q6H                                            20mg/kg Q8 -12H) (if 
● 
Lung Abscess                                                                                      I       Piperacillin tazobactam          AND     Add Vancomycin (15 to           Empirical therapy depends on the setting. 
● 
Metronidazole is not recommended as monotherapy. 
influenzae                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     weeks as per clinical improvement and radiological clearance. 
RES                                               Streptococcus spp. and H.                                                                                                                                                                                                     ●  Duration of therapy: minimum of 3 to 4 weeks, and up to 14 
Sometimes along with aerobes   
anaerobic bacterial involvement. 
-                                                      
07                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          necrotizing pneumonia should raise the suspicion for 
anaerobic gram -positive  cocci)  
● 
          (Aspiration  related)                                                                                                                                                                                                                 The presence of putrid discharge, indolent course, and 
Fusobacterium spp., and 
consciousness / swallowing. 
Prevotella melaninogenica, 
Primary 
        TDS 
spp., Porphyromonas spp., 
aspiration pneumonia . Aspiration results from impaired 
● 
Lung Abscess                 Oral Anaerobes  (Bacteroides                 I       Amoxicillin -Clavulanate 1.2g IV Q8H followed by 625mg PO            Most primary lung abscesses occur as a complication of 
-secondary worsening after initial improvement. 
 
-no significant improvement in 48 hours 
RES                                               commonly S. aureus 
-severely ill patients 
gram-negative bacilli, less 
vancomycin dosing                ● 
Antibiotics are indicated in 
-                                                     Aerobes:  Pseudonas,  enteric 
06       
Q8H                                              See page   for                             complicating chemical injury.  
anaerobic gram -positive  cocci)  
(Hospital acquired)
                                                                                                                                                                                                    only in one-fourth due to ARDS or bacterial infection 
Fusobacterium spp., and                                     OR     Meropenem 1g IV 
MRSA is considered)  
 
● 
Prevotella melaninogenica,                                                                                                                                                                                                       Secondary worsening after initial rapid improvement occurs 
Pneumonia   
4.5g IV Q6H                                           20mg/kg Q8 -12H) (if 
spp., Porphyromonas spp.,                                                                                                                                                                                                        die shortly after aspiration.  
Oral Anaerobes : (Bacteroides                I       Piperacillin tazobactam         AND      Add Vancomycin (15 to Aspiration                                                                                                                      
those with severe aspiration may have a fulminant course and 
H. influenzae  
with clearing of X-ray with supporting therapy alone. However, 
RES
Aerobes : Streptococcus spp. and 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    antibiotic therapy. Majority show rapid clinical improvement 
anaerobic gram -positive  cocci)  
-         (Community acquired)                                                                                                                                                                                                             have only chemical pneumonitis and do not benefit from 
06                                                 Fusobacterium spp., and                                     Piperacillin/tazobactam 3.375gm IV q 6h for severe disease 
leucocytosis and pulmonary infiltrates within the first 48 hours 
Prevotella melaninogenica, 
          Pneumonia  
TDS for a minimum  of 7 days 
spp., Porphyromonas spp., 
patients with witnessed aspiration who develop fever, 
● 
Aspiration                      Oral Anaerobes : (Bacteroides                I       Amoxicillin -Clavulanate 1.2g IV Q8H followed by 625mg PO            Management of witnessed / documented aspiration event: In 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
#      Clin. Diagnosis           Aetiology                          Empirical Antibiotic Therapy                                             Remarks
Respiratory Infections – Empiric Therapy 
 
----------------Page (43) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
37 | Page  
 
c. Increased sputum purulence
OR       Doxycycline 100mg PO BD x 5d                                                                 
 
RES
and                                                          viruses                                                                                                                                                                                                           exposure. 
II       Azithromycin 500mg PO OD x 3d    
b. Increased sputum volume, 
Respiratory                                                                                                                                                                                                   seen in patients with severe COPD and extensive antibiotic 
-
12      a. Increased dyspnoea,  
M. catarrhalis                        OR       Cefdinir 300mg BD x 5d                                                                             ●  Pseudomonas, Enterobacteriaceae are less common; they are 
following 3 symptoms:    
 
H. influenzae                                                                                                                                                                                                ventilation 
presence of at least 2 of the                                                                         OR       Cefpodoxime 200mg BD x 5d 
pneumoniae                                                                                                                                                                                            ●  Antimicrobials for all patients who require mechanical 
AECOPD                       Strep.                           I       Amoxicillin-Clavulanate 875/125mg PO BD or 500/125mg PO TID x 5d       ●  Start oseltamivir if clinical suspicion of influenza is high 
RES
11
●  Antibiotics not required  
-     
 -- 
Acute Bronchitis        Viral                                                                                                                                                                                                          ●  Symptomatic treatment only  
OR       Doxycycline 100mg PO x 5 -10d 
RES                                                                       II       Azithromycin 500mg OD x 5d 
Amoxicillin 500mg TID or 1g TID x 5 -10d 
-                                                                                     OR 
10
Cefdinir 300mg BD x 5 -10d 
                                                   M. catarrhalis                         OR                                                                                                                                                severe cases 
H. influenzae                                                                                                                                                                                            ●  Duration 5 to 7 days for mild to moderate cases and 10 days for 
Media                                                           OR       Cefpodoxime 200mg BD x 5 -10d 
pneumoniae                                                                                                                                                                                                 more than 25 percent in several regions of India 
Acute Otitis                 Strep.                           I       Amoxicillin -Clavulanate 875/125mg  PO BD or 500/125 mg TID x 5-10d        ●  Macrolide and tetracycline resistance among pneumococci is 
more than 25 percent in several regions of India 
OR       Doxycycline 100mg PO BD x 5 -7d                                                           ●  Macrolide and tetracycline resistance among pneumococci is 
o Secondary worsening after initial improvement 
II       Azithromycin 500mg PO OD x 5d 
RES                                                                                                                                                                                                         o Severe symptoms persisting for at least 3 to 4 days 
OR       Amoxicillin 500mg PO TID or 1g PO TID                                                      o Symptoms persisting beyond 7 to 14 days 
-
0                                                                                                                                                                                                              situations; 
9                                                                                    OR       Cefdinir 300mg BD x 5 -7 days 
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ●  Bacterial infection may be considered in the following 3 
M. catarrhalis                        OR       Cefpodoxime 200mg BD x 5 -7 days                                                            children are complicated by secondary bacterial infection. 
H. influenzae                                                                                                                                                                                           ●  Only 1% of viral acute rhinosinusitis in adults and only 5% in 
I       Amoxicillin-Clavulanate 875/125mg PO BD or 500/125 PO TID x 5 -7d 
pneumoniae                                                                                                                                                                                                 days. Purulent secretions are also common in viral infection.  
Acute Sinusitis           Strep.                         Very few require antibiotic therapy. See remarks                                                       ●  90 to 98% of acute rhinosinusitis is viral; resolves by 5 to 10 
OR       Cephalexin 500mg PO BD 10d 
RES                                                                                          500mg on D1 and 250mg on D2 to D5 
OR       Azithromycin 500mg PO OD x 3d or  
-
pyogenes)                                                                                                                                                                                                ●  Use Centor criteria to decide on need for antibiotics  
0
8
Strep (S.                                  OR       Amoxicillin 500mg PO BD x 10d                                                                   between 5 and 15 at risk. 
 
Haemolytic                                                                                                                                                                                                   is prevention of acute rheumatic fever; primarily children 
                                                                                    I       Penicillin V 500mg  IV BD x 10d 
Group A Beta                                                                                                                                                                                           ●  Bacterial pharyngitis is self-limiting; only reason for treatment 
Acute Pharyngitis     Viral                           Very few require antibiotic therapy. See remarks                                                       ●  90% of pharyngitis in adults and 70% in children are viral  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
#     Clin. Diagnosis     Etiology                           Empirical Antibiotic Therapy                                                    Remarks
Respiratory Infections – Empiric Therapy 
 
----------------Page (44) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
38 | Page  
 
 
                                                                                                                
bleeding and possibly early post - transplant period)                  
before urological procedure associated with mucosal                                                                                                                            
recommended except in select situations (pregnancy,             present in pyelonephritis.                                                                   reliably rule out infection.  
Screening or treating for asymptomatic bacteriuria is not       Lower tract symptoms (cystitis symptoms) may not be               of UTI, even negative results for both tests do not 
organism 2 to 3 weeks apart are requi red for women.             cystitis alone.                                                                                       However, when the clinical history is strongly suggestive 
enough in men but two positive cultures with the same          Fever indicates pyelonephritis or prostatitis rather than               
asymptomatic bacteriuria. Single positive culture is                  pyelonephritis.                                                                                     common in UTI because of low  titres of bacteria   
bacteriuria. Pyuria may or may not be present in                      Unilateral back or flank pain generally indicates                           • Negative tests for bacteriuria (nitrite test) are 
uropathogen is required for diagnosis of asymptomatic                                                                                                                           makes UTI unlikely.  
Asymptomatic bacteriuria:  Growth of ≥ 105/ml of a                discomfort and gross haematuria are often noted as well.         • A negative test for pyuria (leukocyte esterase test) 
care–associated settings may be considered complicated.       frequency, and urgency. Nocturia, hesitancy, suprapubic           • A positive test implies pyuria but not necessarily UTI 
children, and patients who are hospitalized or in health           The typical symptoms of cystitis are dysuria, urinary                   specificity of 94% –98% as compared to microscopy   
disease. In ad dition, infection in men, pregnant women,         Symptoms:                                                                                           • Test for pyuria has a sensitivity of 75%–96% and a 
transplantation; and urinary retention from neurologic                                                                                                                            screening tests.  
obstruction; immunosuppression; renal failure; renal               symptoms.                                                                                            Urine dipsticks for pyuria and bacteriuria are useful 
indwelling catheters, or other drainage devices);                       suggests that CAUTI is not the cause of                                           Urine dipsticks  
relapsing infection, such as foreign bodies (e.g., calculi,            differentiate ASB from CAUTI, but its absence                                
in the presence of factors that pred ispose to persistent or      In the catheterized patient, pyuria does not                                  centrifuged urine.   
accepted definition of complicated UTI includes infection        intermittent catheterization.                                                             urine or > 5 to 10 WBC/hpf in the sediment of 
tract in an immunocompetent host. The generally                     with indwelling urethral, indwelling suprapubic, or                      Pyuria is defined as > 10WBC/mm3 of uncentrifuged 
infection in a structurally and functionally normal urinary        with UTI without other identifiable source in  a patient               Urine examination 
Uncomplicated urinary tract infection (UTI) refers to                uropathogen without symptoms or signs compatible                the time of collection or delay in processing  
Uncomplicated vs complicated UTI                                              Growth of ≥105 colony forming units (CFU)/mL of                        False-positive cultures are caused by contamination at 
individual  (IDSA; sensitivity 90% and specificity 90%)                Catheter associated asymptomatic bacteriuria                            immediately. 
(CFU)/mL or more of a uropathogen in a symptomatic             intermittent catheterization.                                                             removed from refrigeration, it should be processed 
Pyelonephritis: Growth of 10 4 colony-forming units                 indwelling urethral, indwelling suprapubic, or                              refrigerated at 4 degree C up to 24 hours ; but once 
(IDSA; sensitivity 90% and specificity 90%)                                   UTI without other identifiable source in  a patient with               immediately (within 1 to 2 hours ). Otherwise, it may be 
more of a uropathogen in a symptomatic individual                  uropathogen with symptoms or signs compatible with              Urine sample for culture should be processed 
Cystitis:  Growth of 103 colony-forming units (CFU)/mL or       Growth of ≥103 colony forming units (CFU)/mL of                        Culture: 
Definitions (IDSA)                                                                             CAUTI (Catheter associated UTI) :                                                 Diagnosis: 
X.   rinary Tract Infections – Principles of  ntibiotic Therapy 
 
----------------Page (45) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
39 | Page  
 
 
beta-lactams for 7 to 10 days.   
                
5 to 7 days,  cotrimoxazole for 7 to 10 days, and                                                                                                                   
or aminoglycosides   
complete the course. Fluoroquinolones are given for                                                                                                          
tract as compared to  TMP-SMX, fluoroquinolones, 
of clinical response and the antimicrobial chosen to                                                                                                           urinary excretion and are not recommended. 
eradicating infection from the kidneys or the urinary 
ranges from 5 to  10 days, depending on the rapidity                                                                                                          Newer azoles and echinocandins have low level 
as penicillins  and cephalosporins  are less effective  in 
Total duration of antimicrobial therapy generally                                                                                                                or parenteral amphotericin B is an alternative. 
Evidence suggests that c ell wall –active agents  such 
Uncomplicated pyelonephritis                                                                                                                                               birth weight). Fluconazole is the choice. Flucytosine 
weeks of therapy   
7 to 14 days                                                                                                                                                                                instability, scheduled for urologic procedure, low 
*Relapse of cystitis or pyelonephritis requires 2 
Complicated cystitis                                                                                                                                                                  disseminated disease (neutropenia, clinical 
 
Duration of therapy is 3 to 7 days                                                                                                                                           warrant treatment except in those at risk for 
Beta lactam              5 to 7                     7 to 10  
Cystitis                                                                                                                                                                                         or even sepsis. Asymptomatic candiduria does not 
Cotrimoxazole              3 to 7                     7 to 10  
Duration of therapy                                                                                                                                                                  be asymptomatic, or cause cystitis or pyelonephritis 
                                                                                                             Quinolone                  3                         5 to 7                broad spectrum antibiotic therapy, diabetes). It may 
also are important pathogens.                                                                                                                 appropriate           especially in those with risk factors (being in ICU, 
Nitrofurantoin               5 to 7  
enterococci and  Staphylococcus aureus ) and yeasts                                                                                   Not                 Candiduria is common in catheterized patients 
are frequently isolated. Gram -positive bacteria (e.g.,                                                                       pyelonephritis        Candiduria 
d cystitis  
Acinetobacter , and  Morganella  are also                                        Drug                                                         d                                                
Uncomplicat e
Pseudomonas, Klebsiella, Proteus, Citrobacter ,                                                                                  Uncomplicat e        does not warrant longer therapy 
E. coli remains the predominant organism;                      Duration of therapy  - summary  table*                             bacteraemic pyelonephritis. Bacteraemia per se 
Complicated cystitis/pyelonephritis:                                                                                                                                   pyelonephritis. Amikacin may not be effective for 
                                                                                                  weeks of therapy                                                                     Bacteraemia develops in 20–30% of cases of 
uncommon in India                                                                Relapse of cystitis or pye lonephritis requires 2                 Bacteraemic UTI  
active women; does not cause pyelonephritis;                Relapse                                                                                     
cystitis in the West, primarily in young sexually                                                                                                                  macrocrystals alone: dose 50 mg 6 h for treatment  
Staphylococcus saprophyticus accounts for 5–15% of     men in whom prostatitis cannot be excluded)                   2. Formulation containing nitrofurantoin 
along with other organisms, for 5–10%.                            as non -obstructive stone that cannot be removed,            
Proteus, Enterococcus, and Citrobacter species,              (e.g. in patients who have a nidus of infection (such         macrocrystals: dose 100 mg bd for treatment   
E. coli accounts for nearly 90% of isolates; Klebsiella,     warranted in selected patients with complicated UTI       nitrofurantoin monohydrate and nitrofurantoin 
Uncomplicated cystitis/pyelonephritis                             Longer duration with antibiotic durations may be             1. Formulation containing a combination of 
Aetiology                                                                                 Complicated pyelonephritis                                                  Nitrofurantoin is available in two formulations 
 rinary Tract Infections – Principles of  ntibiotic Therapy (continued) 
 
----------------Page (46) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
40 | Page  
 
II       Meropenem 1g IV Q8H                                                                           
prostatitis cannot be excluded) 
UTI                                                                                                                                                                                                                               stone that cannot be removed, men in whom 
TID-QID or 3g Q12H 
OD                        nidus of infection (such as non-obstructive 
-         stones, hydronephrosis etc.)
04                                                                                                                  OR       Cefoperazone-Sulbactam 2g IV                                                 complicated UTI (e.g. in patients who have a ± 
15mg/kg IV 
disease, e.g., neurogenic bladder,renal 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      be warranted in selected patients with 
Amikacin 
Q6H                                                                                              ● 
(Male gender, pregnancy, underlying GU                                                                                                                                                                                                     Longer duration with antibiotic durations may 
                                                                                                                                                                                         ● 
OR       Piperacillin-Tazobactam 4.5g IV                                                Duration as above 
Complicated 
cystitis                                                                                                                                                                                 amikacin monotherapy should not be used. 
Amikacin 15 mg/kg IV OD (for mild to moderate illness only)      ● 
Pyelonephritis                                  Similar to complicated          I                                                                                                                                         In pyelonephritis with suspected bacteraemia, 
imaging)                                                                                                                             OR       Meropenem 1g IV Q8H 
WBC casts, or abnormalities upon 
UTI                                                                                                                       OR       Ertapenem 1g IV OD                                      OD 
 
upper tract disease (i.e. leukocytosis,                                                                                                                                                                                                            therapy 
±         15mg/kg IV      ● 
-         Many patients will have other evidence of                                                                               TID-QID or 3g Q12H                                                                     Bacteraemia per se does not warrant longer 
03
● 
Beta lactam for 7 to 10 days 
culture ≥104CFU/mL.                                                                                                        OR
      Cefoperazone-Sulbactam 2g IV 
Amikacin 
 
● 
Cotrimoxazole for 7 to 10 days 
pain) AND pyuria  AND positive urine 
● 
Quinolone for 5 to 7 days 
Signs and symptoms (e.g., fever, flank                                                              II       Piperacillin-Tazobactam 4.5g IV Q6H 
uncomplicated cystitis                                                                                                                                                     amikacin monotherapy should not be used. 
Amikacin 15mg/kg OD IV (for mild to moderate illness only)       ● 
Pyelonephritis                                  Similar to                                 I                                                                                                                                         In pyelonephritis with suspected bacteraemia 
important pathogens. 
UTI                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Staphylococcus aureus) and yeasts also are 
and yeasts  
Gram-positive bacteria (e.g., enterococci, 
renal stones, hydronephrosis etc.)
-                                                                         Gram-positive bacteria, 
02
As above but for 7-14d                                                                            and Morganella are also frequently isolated. 
disease, e.g., neurogenic bladder, 
Klebsiella, Proteus, 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Klebsiella, Proteus, Citrobacter, Acinetobacter, 
(Male gender, pregnancy, underlying GU 
but Pseudomonas                                                                                                                                                         ●  E. coli predominates but Pseudomonas, 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ● 
Cystitis complicated                        E. coli predominates                                                                                                                                                        Definitive therapy is advisable. 
catheter, no urological instrumentation 
pyelonephritis; It is uncommon in India 
urologic abnormalities, no stones, no                                                                                                                                                                                                           sexually active women; it does not cause 
 
UTI                                                                                                                      OR      Cotrimoxazole 960mg (one DS tablet) BD x 3-5d
                                                                                   
Uncomplicated: female, non-pregnant, no                                                                                                                                                                                                  15% of cystitis in the West, primarily in young 
organisms, for 5–10%. 
● 
-         CFU/mL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Staphylococcus saprophyticus: accounts for 5–
01                                                                       along with other 
II       Ciprofloxacin 500mg PO BD x 3d 
once every 2 to 3 days for 3 doses)  
WBC/hpf) AND positive urine culture ≥103 
                                                                            and Citrobacter species, 
resistant E. coli ( 3 g as a single dose  or 3 g 
urgency, Frequency), pyuria (>10                                                                                 OR      Amoxicillin-Clavulanate 625mg PO TDS x 5-7d 
Proteus, Enterococcus,                                                                                                                                                ● 
Fosfomycin can be considered for multi-drug-
Signs and symptoms (e.g., dysuria, 
of isolates; Klebsiella,                    BD x 5d or 50 mg Q6H                                                                              women. (see complicated cystitis) 
● 
Cystitis uncomplicated                   E. coli accounts for 90%        I       Nitrofurantoin (depending upon the formulation), 100mg PO        Duration of treatment is longer in pregnant 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
#            Clinical Diagnosis                 Aetiology                         Empirical Antibiotic Therapy                                     Remarks
 rinary Tract Infections – Empiric Therapy 
 
----------------Page (47) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
41 | Page  
 
pathogens. 
also are important 
aureus) and yeasts 
Staphylococcus 
 
enterococci and 
UTI
 
bacteria (e.g., 
CFU/mL from a catheterised sample 
-                                                                           Gram-positive 
0
 
8        culture ≥103                                                                                          frequently isolated. 
 
AND positive urine                                                Morganella also 
Acinetobacter, and 
or flank pain) 
Citrobacter, 
(Fever, suprapubic 
Klebsiella, Proteus, 
Signs and symptoms 
clinical features 
but Pseudomonas.  
CAUTI                                                  E. coli predominates                      As for complicated cystitis or pyelonephritis depending on                · 
markers 
UTI                                                                      bacteraemia                                                                                                                                                                    clinical response and fall in inflammatory 
 
duration depends on extent of the disease, 
Secondary to                             As per the primary focus 
-
0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ●  Duration of therapy is at least 2 to 3 weeks; 
7        less commonly secondary to bacteraemia
      for pyelonephritis   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     need drainage only if medical therapy fails 
Commonly secondary to pyelonephritis; 
pyelonephritis: as                  (uncomplicated or complicated)                                                                than 5 cm; abscesses less than 5 cm usually 
● 
Renal abscess                                    Secondary to                             As for pyelonephritis                                                                                    Drainage is indicated for abscesses greater 
therapy and fall in inflammatory markers
 
depends on extent of the disease, clinical response to 
bacteraemia                                                                                                                                                  ●  Duration of therapy is at least 2 to 3 weeks; duration 
UTI
drainage fails or contra indicated. 
Secondary to                             As per the primary focus 
● 
Surgical drainage is indicated of percutaneous 
-
06                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 is usually not required for abscesses less than 3 cm.   
greater in size; drainage is optional for 3 to 5 cm, and 
 
● 
occasionally secondary to bacteraemia                                                                                                                                                                                                      Drainage is recommended for abscesses 5 cm or 
                                                      
this is not established through urine or blood culture.  
Usually secondary to pyelonephritis; 
pyelonephritis  
pathogen for all abscesses irrespective of the size, if 
● 
Perinephric abscess                         Secondary to                             As for pyelonephritis (uncomplicated or complicated)                          Diagnostic aspiration is needed to identify the 
II        Meropenem 1-2g IV Q8H 
characteristics 
UTI
QID or 3g 12 H 
patient 
-                                                                                                                                    Sulbactam 2g IV TID-
05                                                                        depending on 
                                                                                                       OR        Cefoperazone-
                                                                             uncomplicated UTI, 
 
UTI with features of sepsis 
complicated or                         Q6H                                                                                                                amikacin monotherapy should not be used. 
● 
Urosepsis                                            Similar to either             I         Piperacillin-Tazobactam 4.5g IV        ±       Amikacin 15mg/kg IV OD    In pyelonephritis with suspected bacteraemia, 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
#            Clinical Diagnosis               Aetiology                        Empirical Antibiotic Therapy                                       Remarks
 rinary Tract Infections – Empiric Therapy 
 
----------------Page (48) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
42 | Page  
 
GIT
amebiasis . 
-
EHEC                                 I 
03                                                                                               Avoid antibiotics for EHEC  
a feature of cases with proctitis, as in shigellosis or 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       urge to defecate but little passage of stool) may be 
without fever  
 
●  Tenesmus (painful rectal spasms with a strong 
Bloody diarrhoea                E. histolytica                    I      Metronidazole for amoebic dysentery                                                                            ●  EHEC infection causes little or no fever.     
 
have fever) 
dysentery<40% 
GIT                                                     (In E. histolytica 
and C. Difficile  
-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     amebiasis. 
02
parahemolyticus 
a feature of cases with proctitis, as in shigellosis or 
 
NTS, Yersinia, V.                                                                                                                                                                                      urge to defecate but little passage of stool) may be 
●  Tenesmus (painful rectal spasms with a strong 
Campylobacter, 
Escherichia coli. 
For other pathogens see table. 
common with  
with Shiga toxin–producing enterohemorrhagic 
(dysentery) with fever   
Shigella.  Less                          Azithromycin 500mg OD x 3d (for Shigella, NTS, Campylobacter) 
alert the laboratory to the possibility of infection 
Bloody diarrhoea                Common with                  I      Ceftriaxone 2g IV OD x 5d (for Shigella and NTS).                                                       ●  Bloody stools without faecal leukocytes should 
 
(NTS, Shigella; but beta lactams not effective for Campylobacter)  
choice. Beta-lactams are ineffective. 
II     Ceftriaxone 2g IV OD x 3-5d for severe disease 
●  For Campylobacter, azithromycin is the drug of 
Salmonella, Shigella and Campylobacter. 
(High rates of resistance in NTS, Shigella, Campylobacter in India) 
●  Ciprofloxacin resistance is very common in 
OR      Ciprofloxacin 500mg BD x 5d                                                                                
GIT
similar toxigenic process.  
●  Profuse “rice-water” stools suggest cholera or a 
-
01
 
                                                  OR      Cefixime 200mg BD or 400mg OD x 3-5d (Shigella) 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       perfringens). 
difficile. 
cereus, Staphylococcus aureus and Clostridium 
Campylobacter] 
cholera and C.                                                                                                                                                                                        toxin as well (prominent vomiting is usual; Bacillus 
I      Azithromycin 500mg OD x 3d [Non Typhoidal Salmonella (NTS), Shigella, 
●  Consider acute gastroenteritis due to preformed 
Campylobacter, V. 
 
in viral diarrhoea also (rotavirus or norovirus) 
Shigella spp., ETEC, 
disease or immunocompromised status.  
Salmonella) ,                   worsening symptoms. However high fever and significant abdominal pain occur      ●  Antibiotics indicated only in patients with severe 
 
Typhoidal                        justified in patients with high fever, significant abdominal pain, persistent or 
therapy.  
                         Norovirus, NTS  Non 
indicated. Antibiotic indicated only in severe disease. Empirical therapy may be (
Majority of patients do not require antibiotic 
Non bloody diarrhoea       Rotavirus,                        Frequently self-limiting and may not be bacterial. Antibacterial not usually               ●  Antibiotic is indicated in selected cases only. 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
#       Clinical Diagnosis        Aetiology                                Empirical Antibiotic Therapy                                             Remarks
XI. Gastrointestinal Infections – Empiric Therapy 
 
----------------Page (49) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
43 | Page  
 
Consider enterohaemorrhagic E. coli; avoid antibiotics as they increase the risk of HUS by 20-fold. Consider amoebic dysentery (as only < 40% of patients have fever). 
Bloody stools without fever 
difficile is also a consideration). Amoebic dysentery is also a consideration.  
Patients with bloody stools and fever require antibiotics (indicates infection with Shigella, entero-invasive E. coli, Campylobacter, Yersinia, or Vibrio parahaemolyticus; Clostridium 
Bloody stools with fever 
Consider acute gastroenteritis due to preformed toxin as well (prominent vomiting is usual; Bacillus cereus, Staphylococcus aureus and Clostridium perfringens). 
norovirus) 
with high fever, significant abdominal pain, persistent or worsening symptoms. However high fever and significant abdominal pain occur in viral diarrhoea also (rotavirus or 
Frequently self-limiting and may not be bacterial. Antibacterial not usually indicated. Antibiotic is indicated only in severe disease. Empirical therapy may be justified in patients 
Non bloody diarrhoea 
 
antibiotics. A significant proportion of diarrhoea is due to viral pathogens (rotavirus in children and Norovirus in adults). 
producing E. Coli, increased risk of chronic carrier state in NTS infection). Viral pathogens, such as Rotavirus and Norovirus commonly cause diarrhoea and do not require 
Treatment with antibiotics is not recommended for most mild & moderate disease. Antibiotic use may lead to adverse outcomes (e.g. 20 fold higher risk of HUS with Shiga toxin-
Carefully assess the patient before prescribing antimicrobials. Most infectious diarrhoea is self-limited and only requires supportive management.  
Antibiotic therapy  
give if there is fever, significant abdominal pain, or bloody stools) 
Antimotility drug: Loperamide may be used for rapid control of symptoms. It can be used for mild to-moderate diarrhoea but should be avoided in inflammatory diarrhoea (do not 
Symptomatic therapy 
 
Cytomegalovirus. 
Persistent diarrhoea in immunocompromised (most likely causes vary depending on type of immunocompromise): Giardia, Cryptosporidium, Cyclospora, Isospora, Microsporidi a, 
Nosocomial diarrhoea: C. difficile  
Consider acute gastroenteritis due to preformed toxin as well (prominent vomiting is usual; Bacillus cereus, Staphylococcus a ureus and Clostridium perfringens). 
Common pathogens in acute community-acquired diarrhoea:  Rotavirus, Norovirus, Salmonella, Shigella, enterotoxigenic E. coli, Campylobacter; consider V. cholera in outbreaks. 
Microbiology  
 
●    Severe diarrhoea (>6 unformed stools/day, temp >101°F, tenesmus, blood in stool, or faecal leukocytes) 
●    Moderate diarrhoea (3 to 6 unformed stools/day &/or systemic symptoms) 
●    Mild diarrhoea (<3 unformed stools/day, minimal associated symptomatology). 
Dysentery is defined as diarrhoea with visible blood is stools. Dysentery is commonly associated with fever and abdominal pain. 
Acute diarrhoea is defined as diarrhoea of ≤14 days in duration, in contrast to persistent (>14 days and ≤30 days) or chronic (>30 days) diarrhoea.  
Definition: Diarrhoea is defined as the passage of loose or watery stools, typically at least three times in a 24 -hour period. 
Gastrointestinal Infections – Diarrhoea – General Principles 
 
----------------Page (50) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
44 | Page  
 
 
now.  
Cotrimoxazole DS 1 tab BD x 7-14d may be used after AST report as most strains have become sensitive 
Ciprofloxacin resistance is very common in India. Amoxicillin 1g PO TID or 2g IV Q6H x 14d OR 
Ceftriaxone 2g IV Q12H x 10-14d is the choice for severe or complicated enteric fever. 
to azithromycin) 
Diarrhoea is seen in about 25%; constipation is less common.                         Cefixime 400mg OD x 14d (defervescence may be slower and failure rates may be higher as compared 
Fever, anorexia, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting.                                           moderate disease; it also covers scrub typhus and leptospirosis, the two other common bacterial AUFI. 
Enteric fever                                                                                                               Azithromycin 1g PO OD x 5d or 1g on D1, f/b 500mg OD for the next 6 days may be used for mild to 
following salmonellosis. 
Antibiotic use may increase the risk of chronic intestinal carriage 
immunocompromise                                                                                                 Ciprofloxacin R in 1/3, Azithromycin R 7%, Ceftriaxone R 6% (Jacob 2020, CMC Vellore)  
disease, • Severe atherosclerosis, • Malignancy or other      High rates of quinolone resistance in India  
years, • Bacteraemia, • Presence of prostheses, • Valvular heart    
• Severe illness requiring hospitalization, • Age < 6 months or > 50  Duration: 3-7d; 7-14d for bacteraemia  
invasive disease:                                                                                                         Amoxicillin 1g PO TID (if susceptible)  
Treat only severe or invasive disease or if patient at risk for developing        TMP/SMX 160/800mg PO BD (if susceptible)  
bacteraemia,                                                                                                               Ciprofloxacin 500mg PO BD (if susceptible)  
Less than 5% of all patients with Salmonella gastroenteritis develop             Azithromycin 500mg PO OD x 3d (limited studies) 
Non-typhoid Salmonella spp. (NTS)                                                                      Ceftriaxone 2g IV OD  
could be due to referral bias)  
(1. Jain 2020, Dharwad, Karnataka, 2. Taneja 2021, PGI, Chandigarh: high rates of ceftriaxone resistance 
Ceftriaxone resistance 21%1 and 45%2    
Ciprofloxacin resistance 51%1 and 62%2   
Treatment indicated in only moderate or severe cases.                                     High rates of quinolone resistance in India. Increasing ceftriaxone resistance in India 
Shigella spp.                                                                                                                Azithromycin 500mg OD X 3d OR Ceftriaxone 2g IV OD X 3d OR Cefixime 400mg OD x 3-5d.  
Rice water stools                                                                                                        Ciprofloxacin 500mg BD X 3d 
Watery diarrhoea                                                                                                       Azithromycin 1g OD OR 
Cholera                                                                                                                         Doxycycline 300mg OD OR 
Organism and indications for treatment                                                                                                      Treatment 
Gastrointestinal Infections – Diarrhoea – Pathogen specific therapy 
 
----------------Page (51) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
45 | Page  
 
dysentery may be of such severity that an acute abdomen suspected  
patients with amoebic dysentery have fever. The abdominal pain in amoebic 
or microscopic blood in a patient with E. histolytica infection. Fewer than 40% of 
Amoebic dysentery, or amoebic colitis, is defined as diarrhoea with mucus or visible 
without dysentery; only 15 to 33% of symptomatic patients develop dysentery.              Diloxanide furoate 500mg TDS  x 10d.   
Studies in Bangladesh show that E. histolytica infection commonly leads to diarrhoea   AND 
Amoebic dysentery                                                                                                                         Metronidazole 500-750mg PO/IV TID x 5-10d 
• Pseudo appendicitis syndrome  
• Bacteraemia                                                                                                                                  TMP/SMX 160/800mg PO BD x 3-5d (if susceptible)  
• Immunocompromised host                                                                                                        (Not for bacteraemia) 
Treatment recommended for:                                                                                                      Doxycycline 100mg PO BD x 3d OR 
Yersinia spp.                                                                                                                                     Ciprofloxacin 500mg PO BD x 3d OR 
Treatment recommended for severe illness                                                                               Ceftriaxone 2g IV OD x 3d 
Associated with shellfish consumption.                                                                                       Doxycycline 100mg PO BD x 3d OR 
Vibrio parahaemolyticus                                                                                                               Ciprofloxacin 500mg PO BD x 3d OR 
Antibiotic use associated with 20-fold higher risk of HUS  
Enterohemorrhagic E. coli (Shiga toxin producing E. coli, including E. coli 0157:H7)         Treatment not recommended.  
entero-invasive) or empiric therapy of traveller’s diarrhoea  
E. coli (enterotoxigenic, enteropathogenic,                                                                              Ciprofloxacin 500mg PO BD X 1-3d 
• Pregnancy, • Immunocompromised host  
• Worsening or relapsing symptoms  
• Gross blood in stool, • High fever  
• Severe illness, • Age < 6 months or > 50 years                                                                        (Beta lactams are ineffective against Campylobacter) 
Treatment recommended only for:                                                                                               
Frequently self-limiting                                                                                                                   High rates of quinolone resistance in India.  
Campylobacter spp.                                                                                                                        Azithromycin 500mg PO OD X 1-3d 
Organism and indications for treatment                                                                               Treatment 
Gastrointestinal Infections – Diarrhoea – Pathogen specific therapy (continued) 
 
----------------Page (52) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
46 | Page  
 
be added. 
followed by 400mg maintenance dose needs to 
● 
For Candida, fluconazole iv 800mg loading dose 
intraabdominal infection) 
rebound tenderness)  
therapy, postoperative infection or recurrent 
of peritonitis (guarding,                                                                                                                                                                                                                               select situations (recent immunosuppressive 
 
GIT     Abdominal pain, fever, features                                                                                                                                                                                                                 infections, antifungal therapy is indicated only in 
controversial                                                                                                                                                                               ● 
intraabdominal abscess etc.                                                                                                                                                                                                                       When Candida is isolated in intraabdominal 
-
05                                                         mixed infections is 
intraabdominal infections. 
surgical anastomosis,                                                                                      hospital acquired secondary peritonitis) 
                                                             and Candida in                                                                                                                                                                               necessary for patients with community-acquired 
ischemic bowel, leaking 
OR      Meropenem 1g IV Q8H (especially for health care related, or  
● 
Role of Enteroco cci                                                                                                                                                                        Routine coverage against enterococci is not 
appendix, ruptured diverticula, 
mixed infections is controversial.  
                                                              Ertapenem 1g IV OD 
bowel perforation, ruptured                                                              OR 
● 
The role of enterococci and Candida species in 
Candida   
cavity by bowel flora due to 
is adequate. 
Enterococci  
Contamination of peritoneal                                                                                                                                                                                                                      antibiotic therapy after achieving source control 
                                                  OR      Cefoperazone-Sulbactam 2g IV TID-QID or 3g Q12H 
● 
 
                                                                                                                                    With adequate source control, 4 days of 
(Bacteroids spp)  
recurrence. 
Peritonitis 
, Anaerobes                                                                                                                                                                                     contamination, reduce bacterial load & prevent 
● 
Secondary Bacterial           Enterobacteriaceae        I      Piperacillin-Tazobactam 4.5g  IV Q6H                                                                         Emergency surgery to eliminate source of 
Pseudomanas coverage is unnecessary)  
GIT                                                                                               Meropenem 1g IV Q8H (Use only if Ertapenem is not available as 
of E. coli produce ESBL.   
source of infection.  
● 
-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 E. coli is the most common organism.   About 80% 
04      abdominal surgically treatable 
Ertapenem 1g IV OD 
of GI perforation.  
           without an evident intra -
II                                                                                                                                                           ● 
Polymicrobial infection should prompt suspicion 
peritoneal fluid> 250PNMs/μL, 
therapy in them.   
Piperacillin-Tazobactum 4.5g Q6H 
encephalopathy), findings in                                                               OR 
Repeat ascitic fluid PMN count should guide 
(malaise, fatigue,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         needed in those with inadequate response. 
Cefoperazone-Sulbactam 2g IV TID-QID or 3g Q12H 
OR 
● 
Fever, non -localising symptoms                                                                                                                                                                                                                Change of therapy or longer therapy may be 
Streptococci  
Ceftriaxone 2g IV Q24H                                                                                     bacteraemia.   
OR 
 
Pneumococci,                                                                                                                                                                                  clinical response, even in those with 
Cefotaxime 2g IV Q8H                                                                                                ● 
SBP (Primary)                     E.coli, Klebsiella,             I                                                                                                                                                               5 days of therapy is adequate, if there is prompt 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
#       Clinical Diagnosis        Aetiology                             Empirical Antibiotic Therapy                                             Remarks
Gastrointestinal Infections – Empiric Therapy 
 
----------------Page (53) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
47 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
liver abscess.  
 
Klebsiella pneumoniae is an important cause of primary 
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ●  In Asia, monomicrobial infection with hypervirulent 
                                                                                                                                                                                                        predominating.   
and splenic abscess.                                                                                                                                                      enteric gram -negative bacilli and anaerobic species 
● 
Most pyogenic liver abscesses are polymicrobial, with 
infection, arthritis                                                                                                                                     
(UTD) 
GIT                                                 skin soft tissue 
adequacy of drainage, fever, pain, WBC count and CRP. 
such as pneumonia, 
-                                                                                                                                                                                                                         days. (M). Duration of therapy shou ld be guided by 
07
disease elsewhere 
initial parenteral therapy may be shortened to 5 to 7 
 
there is evidence of 
weeks of initial parenteral therapy; in selected cases 
pathogen. Often                                                                                                                                                                           good response, consider oral step down after 2 to 3 
● 
                                          important                                                                                                                                                                                       Duration of antibiotic therapy is 4 to 6 weeks. If there is 
emerged as an                                                                                                                                                                              multiple or multilocular abscesses.   
 
II       Meropenem 1g IV Q8H                                                                                         ●                                                                                    Individualised approach is needed for patients with 
Melioidosis has 
● 
                                                                                                                                                                                                > 10 cm: surgical drainage, usually  
 
● 
> 5 cm:  pigtail drainage  
or 3g Q12H 
                                           
● 
≤5 cm: percutaneous aspiration 
OR       Cefoperazone-Sulbactam 2g IV TID-QID 
Enterococci  
● 
                                                                                                                                                                                                     General rule for those with single abscess is:(UTD)   
 
(Bacteroids spp)  
antibiotic therapy,  
Pyogenic 
Anaerobes                                                                                                                                                                                      require drainage in most patients, in addition to 
● 
Liver Abscess  -               Enterobactericeae,           I       Inj. Piperacillin -Tazobactam IV 4.5g Q6H                                                               Unlike amoebic liver abscess, pyogenic liver abscesses 
outcomes are similar. 
compared to needle aspiration alone, but long-term 
● 
                                                                                                                                                                                                Pigtail drainage may achieve faster response as 
pyogenic liver abscess. 
GIT
 
within 5-7 days; and (4) cannot differentiate from a 
-                                                                                                                                                                                                        abscess; (3) failure to respond to medical therapy 
06
                 
● 
(1) high risk of abscess rupture; (2) large left lobe liver 
           
● 
Drainage is indicated for:  
                                                                                                                                                                                                to medical treatment. 
abscesses, signs of imminent rupture and no response 
Amoebic 
                                                    PO TID x 7-10d.                                                                                                          drainage is indicated only in selected patients: large 
● 
Liver Abscess –                E. histolytica                      I       Metronidazole 500 mg IV Q6H-Q8H or 800 mg                                                    Primary management is medical. Ultrasound guided 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
#     Clinical Diagnosis      Aetiology                             Empirical Antibiotic Therapy                                               Remarks
Gastrointestinal Infections – Empiric Therapy 
 
----------------Page (54) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
48 | Page  
 
Pseudomanas coverage is unnecessary) 
OR     Meropenem 1g IV Q8H (Use only if Ertapenem is not available as 
GIT
OR      Ertapenem 1g IV OD 
-
10
 
Enterococci                              OR      Cefoperazone-Sulbactam 2g IV TID-QID or 3g Q12H 
                             
 
(Bacteroids spp)  
abscess 
Anaerobes 
Intra-abdominal                  Enterobactericeae,         I      Piperacillin -Tazobactam 4.5g  IV Q6H                                                                              
Pseudomanas coverage is unnecessary) 
Meropenem 1g IV Q8H (Use only if Ertapenem is not available as 
OR 
GIT
-                                                                                                     OR      Ertapenem 1g IV OD 
09
 
Enterococci                              OR      Cefoperazone-Sulbactam 2g IV TID-QID or 3g Q12H 
                             
(Bacteroids spp)  
Anaerobes 
 
Cholangitis                            Enterobactericeae,         I      Piperacillin -Tazobactam 4.5g  IV Q6H                                                                              
Pseudomanas coverage is unnecessary) 
OR     Meropenem 1g IV Q8H (Use only if Ertapenem is not available as 
GIT
●                                                       
Stop the day after surgery 
-                                                                                                     OR      Ertapenem 1g IV OD 
08                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ● 
Surgically managed patients  
 
 
of acute cholecystitis have resolved.  
Enterococci                              OR      Cefoperazone-Sulbactam 2g IV TID-QID or 3g Q12H 
                             
● 
Duration if therapy: till signs and symptoms 
(Bacteroids spp)  
● 
Medially managed patients  
Anaerobes 
● 
Duration of therapy   
Acute Cholecystitis               Enterobactericeae,         I      Piperacillin -Tazobactam 4.5g  IV Q6H                                                                                 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                       
#     Clinical Diagnosis         Aetiology         Empirical Antibiotic Therapy                                                       Remarks
Gastrointestinal Infections – Empiric Therapy  
 
----------------Page (55) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
49 | Page  
 
Streptococci 58% R (JIPMER 2018) but MSSA 8% R and MRSA 15% R (ICMR 2021)] 
●  Doxycycline resistance is very common among streptococci, but MSSA and MRSA are largely susceptible to doxycycline [Resistance to tetracycline in India: 
Staphylococci, 21% of MSSA and 34% of MRSA resistant to clindamycin. (ICMR 2021) 
●  Clindamycin resistance is common among streptococci and staphylococci in India and is best avoided. 33% of streptococci are resistant to clindamycin. Among 
●  If eschar, consider angio-invasive organisms (GNB, aspergillosis, mould). 
●  Neutropenic, solid organ transplant, and cirrhotic patients may have cellulitis due to Gram-negative organisms. Consider expanding coverage in these cases.  
staphylococcal infection will not be evident for at least several days after surgery. 
●  Very early post-operative wound infection within 6 to 48 hours after surgery is characteristic of streptococcal infection; in contrast, postoperative 
●  Improvement of erythema can take days, especially in patients with lymphedema, because dead bacteria in the tissues continue to induce Inflammation. 
●  Always elevate affected extremity. Not elevating the limb often leads to treatment failure.  
present. 
●  A nidus of suppuration with surrounding cellulitis (suppurative cellulitis) is a hallmark of staphylococcal cellulitis, although this diagnostic finding is not always 
●  Two types of cellulitis exist. Non-suppurative cellulitis and suppurative cellulitis 
●  Local abscesses may develop, and small patches of overlying skin may subsequently undergo necrosis. 
●  Regional lymphadenopathy is common, and bacteraemia can occur. 
●  Involvement is often extensive, with marked erythema, warmth, and swelling. 
●  Predisposing factors: previous trauma, often minor (laceration, abrasion, puncture wound) or underlying skin lesion (furuncle, ulcer, dermatophyte infection)  
●  Cellulitis is an acute spreading infection of the skin that involves the subcutaneous tissues. 
●  Necrotizing Fasciitis  
●  Animal and Human bite 
●  Snake bite,  
●  Diabetic Foot Infection 
●  Impetigo 
●  Abscess 
●  Folliculitis, Carbuncle, Furuncle  
●  Cellulitis – non-purulent  
●  Cellulitis – purulent  
●  Classification of skin and soft tissue infections 
XII.   Skin and Soft Tissue Infections – General Principles 
 
----------------Page (56) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
50 | Page  
 
infection etc. (refer to the appropriate sections). 
*These recommendations do not apply to diabetic foot infection, infection following traumatic injuries, human bite, animal bite, surgical site 
 
OR      Linezolid 600mg PO/IV Q12H (If MRSA is a consideration) 
SSI
II      Vancomycin 15mg/kg IV Q12H (If MRSA is a consideration)  
-
04
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                systemic toxicity 
OR      Cephazolin 1-2g IV Q8H (If MRSA is NOT a consideration)  
MRSA). 
improvement and there are no signs of 
Purulent cellulitis 
aureus (MSSA and                                                                                                                                                                         oral switch once there is clinical 
● 
Moderate to Severe        Usually caused by S.             I       Cloxacillin 2g IV Q6H (If MRSA is NOT a consideration)                                                Duration of therapy total of 5 to 14 days; 
a drainable abscess. 
 
in the absence of 
SSI                                                                                                      OR       Clindamycin 600mg IV Q8H (if parenteral therapy is needed) 
purulent drainage or exudates 
-
03      defined as cellulitis with 
 
          Suppurative cellulitis is                                                                    II        OR       Clindamycin 300mg PO Q8H  
MRSA). 
and is best avoided 
cellulitis 
aureus (MSSA and                                                                                                                                                                                     ●  Clindamycin resistance is common in India 
● 
Mild Purulent                   Usually caused by S.             I       Cap. Doxycycline 100mg PO BD                                                                                        Duration of therapy for cellulitis is 5-7 days. 
 
II      Clindamycin 600mg IV Q8H x 5-7d 
 
SSI
                                                          Staph aureus 
-
02
B, C, G), 
Cellulitis*                                                                      OR       Cefazolin 1 to 2g IV Q8H 
 
 (e.g., group A, 
Non-purulent 
streptococci                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Moderate to Severe      Beta-haemolytic                    I       Amoxicillin/clavulanate 1.2g IV Q8H                                                                                
and is best avoided 
● 
Clindamycin resistance is common in India 
purulent drainage. 
 
SSI                                                                                             III      Tab. Clindamycin 300mg PO Q8H 
 
skin and no evidence of 
or immunosuppression. 
-                                                         Staph aureus 
01      defined as cellulitis with intact 
severe infection, slow response to therapy, 
B, C, G), 
           Non suppurative cellulitis is                                                                      OR       Tab. Amoxicillin/clavulanate 625mg PO Q8H or 875mg PO Q12H                 days) may be warranted in the setting of 
 (e.g., group A,                                                                                                                                                                                           ● 
Extension of antibiotic therapy (up to 14 
Cellulitis 
streptococci                                                                                                                                                                                                    
● 
Mild Non-purulent           Beta-haemolytic                    I       Tab. Cephalexin 500mg PO Q6H                                                                                      Duration of therapy for cellulitis is 5-7 days. 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
#       Clinical Diagnosis          Aetiology                                  Empirical Antibiotic Therapy                                            Remarks
Skin and Soft Tissue Infections – Cellulitis 
 
----------------Page (57) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
51 | Page  
 
as needed 
● 
Wound debridement should be done 
Also, Acinetobacter.                                                                                                                                                                                                 (JIPMER, AIIMS)  
 
and Aeromonas spp.                                                                                                                                                                                                streptococci resistant to tetracyclines 
hospitalization                                                                         Cefoperazone-Sulbactam 2g IV TID-QID or 3g Q12H                                Q12H 
 
SSI                                                  Pseudomonas spp                                                                                                                                                                                                    (ICMR 2018). About 58% and 79% of 
Severe, requiring                                                                     Piperacillin-tazobactam 4.5g Q6H OR                                           AND      Vancomycin 15mg/kg 
39% of MRSA resistant to clindamycin. 
If water exposure, 
-
10
clindamycin. About 14% of MSSA and 
C.tetani.                                          OR       Clindamycin 300-450mg PO Q8H 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●  About 33% of streptococci resistant to 
Mild to moderate                  bacilli, C.perfringens, 
 
II        OR       Doxycycline 100mg PO BD                                                                                                                in India and is best avoided.  
enteric gram negative 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     among streptococci and staphylococci 
BD 
anerobic streptococci,                                                                                                                                                                                         ● 
Clindamycin resistance is common 
 post trauma                                                              OR Amoxicillin-clavulanate 625mg PO TID or 875mg PO 
MRSA, aerobic and                                                                                                                                                                                                  staph.  
● 
Infected wound-           Polymicrobial: MSSA,       I         Cephalexin 500mg PO Q6H                                                                                                                             Should focus on covering strep and 
SSI
 
(Fresh water laceration)
                                                                                                                                                                                   disease) 
-                                                                                                                         OR         Ciprofloxacin 500mg PO BD                                                   
09
Aeromonas infection)
            hydrophila,                                                                                                                                                               BD (add for severe 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ± 
(suspected 
Cellulitis                          Aeromonas                           I       Ceftriaxone 2g IV OD                                                                                      Doxycycline 100 mg PO         
(For mild disease, without risk factors for severe disease  ) 
SSI                                                                                                                     OR ciprofloxacin 500 mg BD  
-                                                                                                                         Doxycycline 100mg PO BD                                                                                                                              
08
 
(Sea water laceration)
                                                                                                                           severe disease)                                                                                                500 mg BD 
Vibrio vulnificus infection)  
                                                        (For severe disease or mild disease with risk factors for                          BD OR ciprofloxacin 
(suspected                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ● 
Cellulitis                          Vibrio vulnificus                           Ceftriaxone 1g IV Q24H                                                                   AND      Doxycycline 100mg PO         Rare, but rapidly fatal if untreated.  
II       Tab. Clindamycin 300mg PO Q8H  
SSI
OR       Doxycycline 100mg PO BD x 7d 
-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                in India and is best avoided 
07      like crust)
                                                                       OR       Tab. Amoxicillin/clavulanate 625mg PO Q8H or 875mg PO Q12H 
among streptococci and staphylococci 
          (After rupture, thin varnish 
OR       Tab. Cephalexin 500mg PO Q6H                                                                                                  ● 
Clindamycin resistance is common 
● 
Impetigo (bullous)        Staphylococcus                    I       Cloxacillin 500mg PO Q6H                                                                                                                              Duration of therapy 7 days 
SSI
secondary colonizer  
● 
honey-crust lesions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Duration of therapy 7 days 
 
-                                                      aureus may be 
06                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
bullous)                                                               
pyogenes. Staph                           OR       Amoxicillin 500mg PO TID x 5d 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mupirocin ointment may be used. 
● 
Impetigo (non-              Streptococcus                              Penicillin V 250-500mg IV Q6H X 5d                                                                                                              If lesions are few, topical therapy with 
SSI
-
and abscess 05
cellulitis 
                                                                                                                    
● 
Carbuncle, furuncle     As for purulent                            As for purulent cellulitis                                                                                                                                   Duration of therapy 5 to 7 days 
 
                                                                                                     
                                              
#    Clinical Diagnosis   Aetiology           Empirical Antibiotic Therapy                                                                Remarks
Skin and Soft Tissue Infections – Cellulitis 
 
----------------Page (58) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
52 | Page  
 
 
 
 
Severe or limb threatening infections should be treated with broad spectrum therapy covering MSSA, MRSA, streptococci, Enterobacteriaceae and anaerobes.
  
Chronic refractory ulcers, particularly those with gangrene          Enterococci, diphtheroids, anaerobes, and even fungi  
Macerated lesions                                                                                  Non-enteric gram-negative bacilli such as P. aeruginosa 
Chronic or previously treated ulcers                                                   Enterobacteriaceae  
Additional pathogens need to be considered as follows: 
  
S. aureus and β-haemolytic streptococci are common pathogens for cellulitis or mildly infected ulcers.  
  
wounds may harbour polymicrobial flora, including gram-negative and anaerobic bacteria  
Acute infections in previously untreated patients are usually caused by aerobic gram-positive cocci (often as a monomicrobial infection), but deep or chronic 
  
If swabs are the only available method, they should be taken only after debriding and cleaning the wound.  
Swabs of superficial lesions often yield contaminants.   
reasonable alternatives. 
Material obtained through curettage (tissue scraping) with a curette or scalpel from the base of a debrided ulcer or needle aspirate of purulent secretions are 
Deep tissue specimens, obtained aseptically at surgery, usually contain only the true pathogens.  
Establishing the pathogen 
  
(see international working group on diabetic foot classifications in the table) 
If there is evidence of infection, then antibiotics are indicated depending on the severity  
Cultures should not be taken from clinically non-infected wounds 
Non infected ulcers do not need antibiotics 
Look for evidence of infection (features of inflammation or purulence) 
Diabetic foot infection:  
Skin and Soft Tissue Infections – Diabetic Foot 
 
----------------Page (59) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
53 | Page  
 
anaerobes)                                                                                                          Q12H (if MRSA is considered)  
bacilli,                                OR       Meropenem 1-2g IV Q8H                          Add Vancomycin 15mg/kg 
SSI
negative                                                                                                                                                                                 
-
11
aerobic Gram-                              IV TID-QID or 3g Q12H                               patient is in shock)                                  
OR  
 
Cefoperazone-Sulbactam 2g                                                                        GroupA Strep,                                                                                                     the primary antibiotic or the 
(with features of sepsis)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               osteomyelitis 
                                    (Staph aureus,                Q6H/Q8H                                                                   IV OD (particularly if BL/BLI is 
● 
Consider and evaluate for underlying 
Diabetic foot infection: severe             Polymicrobial         I       Piperacillin-Tazobactam 4.5g IV              AND      Consider Amikacin15 -20mg/kg 
usually sufficient   
etc. but without sepsis
 
than five days) following surgery is 
3. Presence of systemic signs – fever, malaise, 
course of oral antibiotic therapy (less 
joint or tendon                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the entire area of infection, a brief 
SSI                                                                                                                 QID or 3g Q12H 
● 
tissue such as involvement of muscle, bone,                                                                                                                                                                                                           If the patient underwent resection of 
Cefoperazone-Sulbactam 2g IV TID-
-
11                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            treatment (up to four weeks).  2. Involvement tissues deep to subcutaneous 
anaerobes)                      OR 
● 
          margin,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Some patients may require extended 
aerobic GNB, 
● 
Duration; 1 to 2 weeks  
1. Inflammation spreading > 2 cm beyond ulcer 
Group A Strep,                                                                                                                                                                  ● 
Source control is mainstay  
One of the following:  
(Staph aureus,                Q6H/Q8H                                                                   Q12H (if MRSA is considered)              debridement. 
● 
Diabetic foot infection: moderate       Polymicrobial         I       Piperacillin-Tazobactam 4.5g IV              AND      Add Vancomycin 15mg/kg                   Surgical consultation for drainage or 
Clindamycin 600mg IV Q8H  
II       Cefazolin 1g IV Q8H 
SSI
-                                                                                                                     Clindamycin 300mg PO TDS 
11
warmth, tenderness, pain or purulence
                                                                    
Features of inflammation include erythema,                                                     Cephalexin 500mg PO QID  
signs).  
pyogenes 
in India and is best avoided.  
> 0.5 cm but ≤ 2 cm around ulcer, no systemic 
Streptococcus                 Amoxicillin-Clavulanate 625mg PO TDS  
among streptococci and staphylococci 
(Inflammation of skin and subcutaneous tissue, 
s aureus                                                                                                                                                                             ●  Clindamycin resistance is common 
● 
Diabetic foot infection: mild                 Staphylococcu        I       Cloxacillin 500-1000mg PO Q6H                                                                                             Duration of therapy one to two weeks 
SSI
appropriate footwear;  
-
11      ≤0.5 cm around the ulcer
                                                                   deformities leading to ulceration such as hammer toes or hallux valgus; use 
          No evidence of inflammation except erythema 
Address the biomechanical problems causing the ulcer; consider correcting 
Diabetic foot ulcer: non infected                                                   No role for antibiotics                                                                                                             
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                               
#               Clinical Diagnosis                Etiology                             Empirical Antibiotic Therapy                                      Remarks
Skin and Soft Tissue Infections – Diabetic Foot 
 
----------------Page (60) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
54 | Page  
 
SSI
-
12                                                                                                   OR        Moxifloxacin 400mg PO/IV Q24H (in case of penicillin allergy) 
 
 
1.2g IV Q8H 
or 
875 mg PO BID  
cat and dog bites.
 
bites 
should be covered in                 or 
Animal and human       Pasteurella multocida        I      Amoxicillin/clavulanate 625mg PO TDS                                                                                 
SSI
 
-                                                                                                      OR        Piperacillin-Tazobactam 4.5g IV Q6H/Q8H 
12
 
 
 
1.2g IV Q8H 
or 
875mg PO BD  
 
or  
Snake Bite Cellulitis                                                      I      Amoxycillin/clavulanate 625mg PO TID                                                                                  
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                    
#     Clinical Diagnosis          Etiology                                     Empirical Antibiotic Therapy                                              Remarks
Skin and Soft Tissue Infections - Bites 
 
----------------Page (61) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
55 | Page
Aeromonas   
Vibrio vulnificus 
Type III necrotizing fasciitis (monomicrobial, Gram negative; Vibrio or Aeromonas) 
level; CRP, >15 mg/dl; LRINEC score >6]
[tachycardia, >120 beats/min; hypotension; elevated CK
2253):                                                                                                 preferably called as NSTI (necrotizing soft tissue infection).  
● Features suggesting necrotizing fasciitis (NEJM 2017, 377:     aureus. NF due to S. pyogenes is associated muscle necrosis in 20 to 40 % of patients and is 
fascia.                                                                                                 underlying illness. Gas in the tissue is usually absent in NF due to S. pyogenes or Staph 
incision, the probe easily reaches down to the deep                type I infections, Type II infections may occur in any age group and in persons without any 
● Positive probe test: on inserting a probe through a limited    pyogenes). Occasionally, MRSA may cause NF. MSSA has not been associated with NF. Unlike 
● Progress of erythema beyond the initially marked margins     Most common pathogen is Group A beta haemolytic streptococcus (Streptococcus 
● Areas of impaired sensation                                                          Type II necrotizing fasciitis (monomicrobial, Gram positive) 
● Haemorrhagic bullae
● Skin necrosis
● Bluish, maroon, or black discolouration of the skin                   Often associated with gas in the tissue and thus is difficult to distinguish from gas gangrene. 
dysfunction.                                                                                      rectal fissures, episiotomies, and colonic or urologic surgery or gynecologic procedures.  
● Severe systemic features such as hypotension or organ          Predisposing factors include diabetic or decubitus ulcers, hemorrhoids, 
● Pain out of proportion to physical findings                                 Usually seen in the in the elderly or in those with underlying illnesses.  
rather than simple cellulitis. 
Any of the following should raise suspicion of necrotizing fasciitis        anaerobes such as non-group A streptococci, Enterobacteriaceae. 
Antibiotics are only an adjunct.                                                                     Anaerobes, most commonly Bacteroides or Peptostreptococcus with one or more facultative 
Prompt debridement is required.                                                                 Mixed infection of anaerobes with aerobes 
Requires emergency surgical evaluation.                                                    Type I necrotizing fasciitis (polymicrobial) 
Skin and Soft Tissue Infections - Necrotizing Fasciitis 
----------------Page (62) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
56 | Page
doxycycline 
Minocycline may be used instead of
BD 
severe disease or underling disease. 
Ciprofloxacin 500mg PO 
Initial IV therapy in those with 
OR                                                 duration therapy is warranted with 
SSI
without underlying disease; longer 
Sea water laceration                                                                                                                                     BD 
-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   antibiotic in those with mild illness 
15
Vibrio vulnificus                   I      Ceftriaxone 2g IV OD                                                      AND      Doxycycline 100mg  IV/PO 
therapy 5 to 7 days with oral 
 
● 
Vibrio vulnificus: Duration of 
negative)
(Monomicrobial, Gram 
Ciprofloxacin 500mg PO BD 
Fresh water laceration 
for bacteraemia
Type III 
hydrophila,                                  OR                                                                                                   BD                                                 for wound infections and 14 days 
● 
Necrotizing fasciitis-     Aeromonas                          I      Ceftriaxone 2g IV OD                                                      AND      Doxycycline 100mg  IV/PO        Aeromonas : Duration: 7 to 10 days 
associated with NF. 
MSSA has not been 
occasionally by MRSA. 
SSI-1
Streptococcus) and 
pyogenes (Group A 
4   Streptococcus)
 
Streptococcus 
(Monomicrobial, Group A 
common are 
Type II 
organisms- most                        Penicillin G 4MU IV Q4H                                                             IV Q8H/Q6H 
Necrotizing fasciitis-     Gram positive                      I                                                                                                           AND      Clindamycin 600 -900mg 
Enterobacteriaceae) 
SSI                                                   streptococci, 
opsonization and phagocytosis)
(non-group A 
-                                                                                                   OR      Meropenem 1-2g IV Q8H 
13
protein synthesis; enhances 
facultative anaerobes 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (inhibition of exotoxin and M 
with one or more 
anaerobic and aerobic)
included in all cases of NF
Peptostreptococcus) 
● 
(Polymicrobial, mixed                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Clindamycin should probably be 
IV Q8H/Q6H 
or 
Type I 
commonly Bacteroides                                                                                                                                 Clindamycin 600 -900mg           longer; needs to b individualized. 
● 
Necrotizing fasciitis-     Anaerobes (most                I      Piperacillin-Tazobactam 4.5g IV Q6H                          AND                                                                   Duration of therapy is 2 weeks or 
 
 
 
#    Clinical Diagnosis          Etiology                                        Empirical Antibiotic Therapy                                              Remarks
Skin and Soft Tissue Infections - Necrotizing Fasciitis 
----------------Page (63) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
57 | Page
Consider TB and Brucella in subacute or chronic vertebral osteomyelitis.  
Vertebral osteomyelitis: S. aureus most common in acute vertebral osteomyelitis but a variety of other organisms may cause.    
(usually takes at least six weeks from the last debridement). Highly bioavailable oral antibiotic may be used after initial p  arenteral therapy to complete the course.  
if there is concomitant soft tissue infection.  If there is residual infected bone: continue an  tibiotic until debrided bone has been covered by vascularized soft tissue 
Duration: If no residual infected bone: at least 2 to 5 days after last debridement if there is no concomitant soft tissue infection at   the operative site; 10 to 14 days 
Acinetobacter, one Pseudomonas); 68% of staph was MRSA.  
surgical sample: 22 out of 26 were gram positive cocci (staph aureus 19, streptococcus pyogenes 2; enterococcus 1); 8 out of   26 were GNB (6 enteric GNB, one 
Extremity osteomyelitis: Srinivas T, 2011; JIPMER, 2005 to 2010, children 1 to 12 with multifocal osteomyelitis; neonates excluded. Organisms cultured   from 
skin soft tissue infection and visceral abscess such as liver abscess and splenic abscess.   
Melioidosis is an important pathogen that causes acute arthritis (monoarthritis or polyarthritis). Often there is evidence of  disease elsewhere such as pneumonia, 
For staph aureus with bacteraemia: 4 weeks of parenteral therapy  
Duration: For staph aureus without bacteraemia: at least 14 days of parenteral therapy foll owed by oral therapy for additional 7 to 14 days.   
only 42%  
31%; 38% of the staph were MRSA and nearly half the GNB were Pseudomonas. History of fever in 75%, l eucocytosis only in 66%, gram stain showed organisms in 
George J, 2019, CMC Vellore, 2006 to 2017; 70 adults; 49 had positive synovial culture; among the 49, 38% grew staph and 27%  grew streptococci; GNB grew in 
Septic arthritis 
debris.
staining is diagnostic in only 50% of these cases. False -positive Gram stains of synovial fluid can occu r because of artefacts from stain, mucin, and cellular
oSynovial fluid culture in patients who have not previously received antibiotics will yield bacterial growth up to 80% to 90%  of the time; however, Gram
higher sensitivity of 77% but lower specificity of 73%.
oSynovial fluid WBC count of >50,000 WBC/cu.mm has a sensitivity of 62% and specificity of 92%. A synovial fluid WBC count of >25,000 WBC/cmm has a
• Synovial fluid analysis:
• De-escalate once the causative organism is identified.
bacteremia, and is usually caused by S. aureus.
• Polyarticular arthritis is observed in 10% to 20% of patients, especially in those with rheumatoid arthritis, immunosuppression, or prolonged or intense
• In adults, fever and malaise are common but high fever with rigors and shaking chills are typically not apparent.
In children, hip infections predominate.
• Arthritis is monoarticular in 80% to 90% of cases. The most common joint affected is the knee in adults. Hip, shoulder, wrist, and ankle are frequently involved.
• Hematogenous spread is the most common route in all age groups.
XIII.Bone and Joint Infections
----------------Page (64) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
58 | Page  
BJI
epidural abscess 
-
0                                                                                               
6
Osteomyelitis +/- 
                                                                                                (Maximum of 2g per dose) 
● 
Vertebral                   S.aureus, others                                  Vancomycin 15 to 20mg/kg IV Q8H      AND       Piperacillin tazobactam 4.5g IV Q6H                 See General Principles  
 
neg bacilli 
BJI
Staph aureus, Group A strep. Gm-
-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ●  Infants > 4 months , children, adults : 
0
 
5
Gram-neg bacilli                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           neg. bacilli, Group B strep.  
 
Osteomyelitis 
(Maximum of 2g per dose)                                                                                                                 ● 
Streptococci,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Infants < 4 months : S. aureus, Gm -
● 
Extremity                   Staph aureus,                                        Vancomycin 15 to 20mg/kg IV Q8H       AND       Piperacillin tazobactam 4.5g IV Q6H                 S. aureus is most common  
BJI
Acinetobacter etc  
unless the patient has features of sepsis.   
-                                                 Klebsiella, Pseudomonas,                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
0
Infection  
4                                                                                              pathogen. It is preferable to wait till culture reports are available. Avoid empiric therapy 
Enterococci, GNB such as E coli,                                                                                                                                                                                                                  possible organism.  
 
● 
Prosthetic Joint        MSSA, MRSA, CONS,                           Empirical therapy is very difficult; every effort must be made to establish the causative          Therapy should be as per the 
BJI
-
Monoarthritis 0
3
 
Chronic                       Tuberculosis,  Brucella                                                                                                                                                                                             
 
BJI
streptococcus. 
-                                                 Staphylococcus and 
0        arthritis 
For melioidosis, see above  
2
hepatitisB, rubeIla, parvo B19);  
 
polyarticular                                                              For Gonococcus, Ceftriaxone 2g IV OD  
fever; viruses (chikungunya, 
Arthritis-Acute            Gonococci, acute rheumatic             Depends on suspected aetiology.                                                                                                         
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ceftriaxone (to cover Neisseria)  
Gram negative diplococci: 
 
Meropenem 1-2g IV Q8H                                                                                                         empiric therapy   
important pathogen 
 
BJI                                             Melioidosis has emerged as an          I        Ceftazidime 2g IV Q8H or                                                                                                         No organisms: As given under 
therapy 
-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                tazobactam   
0
1        used to guide empiric                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Gram negative bacilli: Piperacillin 
bacilli. 
                                                                                                                                                                                     
Gram stain should be      A, B, C, G, F). aerobic Gm-neg.                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Gram positive cocci: Vancomycin   
OR     Meropenem 1g IV Q8H 
S. aureus, streptococci (group 
empiric therapy  
 
Children and adults:                              I        Vancomycin                                    AND       Piperacillin tazobactam 4.5g IV Q6H  
fluid should be used to guide 
Monoarthritis            
Gram stain  of the synovial 
group B streptococcus 
OR     Piperacillin tazobactam 4.5g IV Q6H 
Acute 
aureus, gram negative bacilli,                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
● 
Septic Arthritis-        Infants (<3 months): Staph                   I        Vancomycin                                    AND       Meropenem 1g IV Q8H                                        See General Principles  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
#      Clin. Diagnosis           Aetiology                                        Empirical Antibiotic Therapy                                             Remarks
Bone and Joint Infections 
 
----------------Page (65) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
59 | Page
days following the last positive culture 
cultures are positive, treat for 10 to 14 
enteric GNB                                                                                                                                                                                            recommend 21 days for GNB. If repeat 
shunt 
Cutibacterium acnes,                    (Maximum of 2g per dose)                                         Q8H                                        Duration 10 to 14 days; some 
Infected EVD or VP       MSSA, MRSA, CoNS,              I       Vancomycin 15 to 20mg/kg IV Q8H            AND       Meropenem 2g IV 
(Max of 2 g per dose)  
Streptococcus pyogenes  
OR       Inj. Cefotaxime 2g IV Q4H 
basal skull fracture                                                          
Hemophilus influenza,                                                                                                                      20mg/kg IV Q8H  
Meningitis following    Pneumococcus                        I       Inj. Ceftriaxone 2g IV Q12H                           AND       Vancomycin 15 to 
basal skull fracture  
trauma without 
MRSA, CoNS,   
penetrating head 
Pseudomonas, MSSA,                    (Maximum of 2g per dose)                                          Q8H 
CNS
Meningitis following    Enteric GNB,                            I       Vancomycin 15 to 20mg/kg IV Q8H             AND       Meropenem 2g IV 
-
01
Pseudomonas  
 
neurosurgery   
enteric GNB,                                    (Maximum of 2g per dose)                                          Q8H 
Meningitis following    MSSA, MRSA, CoNS,               I       Vancomycin 15 to 20mg/kg IV Q8H             AND       Meropenem 2g IV 
studies from developing countries.
gram negative bacilli. 
in pneumococcal meningitis.  Benefit is less clear in 
least 3 weeks for meningitis with              antibiotic. It has been found to be useful primarily 
selected situations  
just before or at least along with the first dose of 
staphylococcal meningitis and at 
cover Listeria in                   may be given. First dose of steroid should be given 
days for pneumococcal or 
● 
Ampicillin 2g Q4H to          Dexamethasone 0.15 mg/kg IV Q6H for 2 to 4 days 
Haemophilus meningitis; 10 to 14              otitis/sinusitis.
● 
Add Inj. Metronidazole 500mg IV Q6H, if coexistent 
situations  
low sugar and high protein)                                                                     meningitis; at least 7 days for    AND 
immunosuppression).
Listeria in selected 
neutrophilic pleocytosis, 
uncomplicated meningococcal 
Listeria (<1 month, >55 years, pregnancy, alcoholism, and
● 
Addition of high dose ampicillin in those at risk for
neck stiffness, CSF showing 
Duration of therapy: 7 days for    dose)                                 ● 
Do CT before LP only if there are clear indications.
Hemophilus influenzae  
(fever, altered sensorium, 
● 
If there are no indications for CT, go ahead with LP.
(Maximum of 2g per 
meningococcus and 
antibiotic as early as possible.
Meningitis                                                                         OR   
pneumococcus                                          Inj. Cefotaxime 2g IV Q4H                                   20mg/kg IV Q8H  
● 
Draw blood culture and administer the first dose of
● 
Acute Bacterial              Usually caused by                   I       Inj. Ceftriaxone 2g IV Q12H                           AND       Vancomycin 15 to               See treatment of pneumococcal infections @page 8.
#    Clinical Diagnosis         Aetiology                               Empirical Antibiotic Therapy                                             Remarks
XIV.Nervous System Infections
----------------Page (66) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
60 | Page  
 
Pseudomonas spp                        g) 
 
trauma or neurosurgery:             Enterobacteriaceae                     dose not exceeding 2 
 
AND      Meropenem 2g IV Q8H                                      abnormal, continue long term 
Following penetrating                 streptococci,                                mg/kg Q8H (single 
resolution of the abscess; then taper off or, if EEG is 
S. aureus , CONS, 
I       Vancomycin 15 to 20                                                                                                      should be continued for at least 3 months after 
● 
Prophylactic anticonvulsant therapy is indicated and 
2 g) 
the risk of rupture of the abscess.  
mg/kg Q8H (single dose not exceeding           delays encapsulation of the abscess and may increase anaerobes  
with infective endocarditis
                                                                                                                                                                                 6H. It should be tapered as rapidly as possible; steroid 
Enterobacteriaceae,                                                                                      Vancomycin if MRSA is likely 15 to 20 
● 
Dose of dexamethasone is 10 mg stat followed by 4 mg q 
bacteraemia or associated                                                                                                                     AND
 
streptococci,                                                                                                   AND 
increased ICP.  
Unknown source or 
S. aureus,                                                                                                                                                                                                abscess oedema and associated mass effect and 
500mg) IV Q8H /Q6H 
usually reserved for patients with substantial peri-
I       Ceftriaxone 2g IV Q12H                   Inj. Metronidazole 7.5mg/Kg (Usually          ● 
Dexamethasone should not be given routinely. It is 
Enterobacteriaceae                                                                                                                                                                               abscess.  
otitis:                                                                                                                                                                        500 mg) IV Q8H /Q6H 
sufficient in those who undergo complete excision of the 
anaerobes,                                                                                        AND
 
Associated with chronic                                                                                                                                                                                                                               not well defined.  Shorter duration (3 to 4 weeks)  is Inj. Metronidazole 7.5mg/Kg (Usually 
Streptococci,                        I       Ceftriaxone 2g IV Q12H  
therapy is necessary. Role of additional oral therapy is 
S. aureus                                                                                                                                                                                             ●  A minimum of 6–8 weeks of parenteral antibiotic 
CNS
500 mg) IV Q8H /Q6H                                         to therapy. Enterobacteriaceae,                                                                                                                                
Associated with sinusitis:                                                                                                                       AND
                                                                                                                                                                                    on initial size, causative pathogen and response 
anaerobes,                                                                                                      Inj. Metronidazole 7.5mg/Kg (Usually 
-
● 
02                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Duration is for 6 to 8 weeks or longer depending 
Streptococci,                       I       Ceftriaxone 2g IV Q12H 
● 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Rule out TB, Nocardia, Aspergillus, Mucor  
.
IV Q12H                                                                                                               suspected  
bronchiectasis:                              
                                                                                                                                                                                                  pathogens such as E. coli or Klebsiella are 
OR      Ceftriaxone 2g                     500 mg) IV Q8H /Q6H 
lung abscess, empyema,             anaerobes                                                                                         AND                                                                                         ● 
Use meropenem if ESBL producing Gram negative 
Inj. Metronidazole 7.5mg/Kg (Usually 
Associated with                            Streptococci,                                Q4H                                                                                                                                   none are grown. 
I       Penicillin G 40MU IV                                                                                                      coverage should ALWAYS be continued even if 
be adjusted based on culture results, anaerobic 
IV Q12H 
and underlying condition. While therapy should 
infection:
 
anaerobes                                      OR      Ceftriaxone 2g                     500mg) IV Q8H /Q6H                                      ● 
Empiric treatment is guided by suspected source 
AND 
Associated with dental               Streptococci, 
Q4H                                                    Inj. Metronidazole 7.5mg/Kg (Usually             patient 
abscess, inaccessible site of lesion or moribund 
I       Penicillin G 40MU IV 
unencapsulated abscess (cerebritis), <2cm 
IV Q12H 
● 
Prompt drainage is essential except in 
heart disease:                               viridans)                                         OR       Ceftriaxone 2g 
                                                                                                                                                                                                   and Mycobacterium tuberculosis.  
 
Associated with cyanotic           Streptococci (esp. 
Q4H                                                                                                                                   culture for aerobes , аոаerοbeѕ, fungi, 
and to reduce the size of the collection.   Send for 
I       Penicillin G 40MU IV                        
samples before  initiation of antibiotic therapy 
(Fever, altered sensorium, focal deficit, raised ICT features)    
recommended as soon as possible to  obtains 
● 
Brain Abscess                                                                                                                                                                               Prompt n eedle spiration or ѕսrgiсаl excision 
 
                                   
                                                                                                                                                             
#      Clinical Diagnosis    Aetiology           Empirical Antibiotic Therapy                                                     Remarks
Nervous System Infections 
 
----------------Page (67) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
61 | Page  
 
Pseudomonas
 
bacilli including 
 
neurosurgery
Gram negative                                                                                                    (single dose not exceeding 2 g)  
Following                         MSSA, MRSA,                I      Inj. Meropenem 2g IV Q8H              AND       Vancomycin 15 to 20mg/kg IV Q8H 
 
CNS
coccus species. 
and Peptostrepto
-
04
as Cutibacterium                                                                                                (single dose not exceeding 2g) 
 
such                                                                                                                       Vancomycin 15 to 20mg/kg IV Q8H 
other anaerobes                                                                                                                                                                                    therapy 
● 
Associated osteomyelitis may require longer 
streptococci,                                                                                                                                             ± 
otitis                                                                                                                                                                                              drainage.  
anaerobic                                                                                                              
● 
Duration of therapy is 3 to 6 weeks after the 
Following sinusitis or     Aerobic and                    I      Inj. Ceftriaxone 2g IV Q12H             AND       Inj. Metronidazole 500mg IV Q8H /Q6H 
 
initial empirical antibiotic therapy  
the time of drainage should be used to adjust 
Fever, raised ICT features, neck stiffness, seizure, focal deficit    
● 
Gram’s stain and culture of the pus obtained at 
● 
Epidural Abscess                                                                                                                                                                                        Prompt neurosurgical drainage is indicated   
Pseudomonas.  
head injury  
bacilli including 
neurosurgery or 
Gram negative                                                                                                    (single dose not exceeding 2 g)  
Following                         Staphylococci,               I      Inj. Meropenem 2g IV Q8H              AND       Vancomycin 15 to 20mg/kg IV Q8H 
 
CNS
anaerobes   
(single dose not exceeding 2 g)  
-                                                      negative bacilli,    
03
Vancomycin 15 to 20mg/kg IV Q8H 
enteric gram -
 
 
staphylococci, 
● 
±                                            longer therapy  
streptococci, 
may require  
anaerobic                                                                                                              
● 
Patients with associated cranial osteomyelitis 
Following sinusitis           Aerobic and                    I      Inj. Ceftriaxone 2g IV Q12H              AND       Metronidazole 500mg IV Q8H /6H 
 
weeks after drainage of subdural empyema   
● 
Duration of antibiotic therapy: minimum of 3 to 4 
Fever, raised ICT features, neck stiffness, seizure, focal deficit    
craniectomy or burr hole.  
● 
Subdural Empyema                                                                                                                                                                                  Urgent drainage is essential through craniotomy, 
 
                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                          
#     Clinical Diagnosis        Aetiology                               Empirical Antibiotic Therapy                                               Remarks
Nervous System Infections 
 
----------------Page (68) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
62 | Page  
                                                                                                                         demonstrate such synergism. 
heath care associated IE.                                                                            lactams for enterococci. But tobramycin and amikacin do not 
separately for NVE vs PVE or for community acquired IE vs                Gentamicin and streptomycin demonstrate synergism with beta      
negative pathogens and fungi. However, data are not shown           infection.                                                                                                         
small but significant contribution from non-HACEK Gram                   be used for streptococcal infection but not for enterococcal            also need to be considered. 
streptococci, staphylococci and enterococci. Some studies show     For definitive therapy, single daily aminoglycoside dosing may        IE mimics such as NBTE/marantic endocarditis, atrial myxoma 
The three most common pathogens in Indian studies are                  endocarditis, traditional thrice daily dosing should be used.                 
                                                                                                                         Use of aminoglycosides: For empirical therapy of infective               broth blood culture systems (such as BacT/alert). 
viridans group streptococci, HACEK organisms, and enterococci.                                                                                                                               five days with current automated continuously monitored liquid 
symptomatic for weeks), therapy should cover S. aureus,                   mg).                                                                                                                 fastidious and can be easily isolated when incubated for at least 
For patients with a subacute clinical presentation (ie,                          infections (use actual body weight; should not exceed 3,000             Recent evidence suggests that HACEK organisms are not 
                                                                                                                         patients with suspected or documented serious MRSA                        
streptococci, and aerobic gram-negative bacilli.                                    A loading dose of 20 to 35 mg/kg is recommended in critically ill     need to be considered (e.g., Aspergillus in PVE). 
for days), therapy should cover S. aureus, beta-hemolytic                  staphylococcal infections.                                                                           Brucella species in the Middle East). Non-candida fungi also 
For patients with acute clinical presentation (ie, symptomatic           streptococcal and enterococcal infections and 15–20 μg/mL for settings (e.g., C. burnetii and Bartonella species in Europe, 
                                                                                                                         exceed 2 g. Adjust for trough level of 10–15 μg/mL for     Some fastidious organisms occur in characteristic geographic 
or immunosuppressed and geographic region).                                     12H for staphylococcal endocarditis. Single doses should not             
care associated vs nosocomial, individual factors such as IVDU         streptococcal or enterococcal endocarditis; 15–20mg/kg Q8-            Granulicatella and Abiotrophia species need to be considered.  
(acute vs subacute, NVE vs PVE, community acquired vs health        weight. Recommended dose for IE varies; 15 mg Q12H for                organisms; nutritionally variant bacteria now designated 
Likely organisms and antibiotic choice depend on the setting            Use of vancomycin: Vancomycin dose is based on actual body         not target these organisms. Therapy should target fastidious 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  thus, in this situation, recommended empirical therapy need 
injected into BacT/Alert aerobic bottle.                                                   for allergic patients.                                                                                     Enterobacteriaceae will present with negative blood cultures; 
minutes. Each venipuncture should draw 10 ml and should be          not severely allergic. Strongly consider penicillin desensitization     infection due to S. aureus, CoNS, enterococci, or 
from separate venipunctures and ideally spaced over 30 to 60          vancomycin if the organism is susceptible and if the patient is          In the absence of prior antibiotic therapy, it is unlikely that 
after at least two, preferably three blood cultures are obtained      For staphylococci, beta lactams are highly preferable to                      
Empirical therapy for acutely ill patients should be given only                                                                                                                                   developing countries.  
better yield in subsequent cultures                                                          important in health care associated IE and early PVE                           inadequate microbiologic techniques are major reasons in 
allow the effect of any prior antibiotics to wear off  allowing              enterococci. Coverage for non-HACEK gram negative bacilli is           Culture negative endocarditis: Prior antibiotic therapy and 
for establishing the causative agent. This waiting period may             MSSA coverage. Vancomycin covers MSSA, MRSA as well as              
culture reports for 48 to 72 hours and draw additional cultures         ceftriaxone will not cover enterococci but provides modest              feet; women = 45.5 kg + 2.3 kg per inch over 5 feet).  
who are acutely ill. Otherwise, it is preferable to wait for initial       but does not cover staphylococci. Empirical therapy with                  streptomycin per kilogram (men = 50 kg + 2.3 kg per inch over 5 
Empirical antibiotic therapy should be given only to patients             Empirical therapy with penicillin G/ampicillin covers enterococci     Ideal body weight is used to calculate doses of gentamicin and 
XV.      Cardiac Infections – Principles of Empirical Therapy for Infective Endocarditis 
 
 
----------------Page (69) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
63 | Page  
                                                           
CVS
-
06                                                                                                                                                                                        
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Infective Endocarditis   
● 
Consult ID  
● 
Culture Negative                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   See overview   
CVS
 
-
Late (>1 year)
05
           Endocarditis - 
acquired NVE, CONS  
Prosthetic Valve                As for Community             I      Vancomycin 15 -20mg/kg Q8 -12H          AND      Gentamicin 1mg/Kg IV Q8H           
CVS
-          Early (<1 year)  
04                                                                                                                                                                              Meropenem 1 -2g IV Q8H  
Candida 
           Endocarditis -  
GNB, Enterococci,                                                                                                                  as well as   
Prosthetic Valve                CONS, Staph aureus,         I      Vancomycin 15 -20mg/kg Q8 -12H          AND      Gentamicin 1mg/Kg IV Q8H                
 
CVS
care associated)  
-                                                           GNB                                    II     Vancomycin 15-20mg/kg Q8-12H          AND     Meropenem 1 -2g IV Q8H  
03
Endocarditis (Health 
including MRSA, 
 
Native Valve                      Staph aureus                      I      Vancomycin 15 -20mg/kg Q8-12H          AND      Gentamicin 1mg/Kg IV Q8H           
HACEK, 
CVS
– SUBACUTE) 
Enterococcus, 
-          (Community acquired      aureus, 
02                                                                                                   Vancomycin 15-20mg/kg Q8-12H                       Gentamicin 1mg/Kg IV Q8H  
II                                                                      +/- 
streptococci, Staph 
           Endocarditis 
viridans, other 
Native Valve 
Streptococcus                    I      Ceftriaxone 2g IV Q24H                              +/-       Gentamicin 1mg/Kg IV Q8H                
CVS
–ACUTE) 
II     Ceftriaxone 2g IV Q24H                              +/-       Gentamicin 1mg/Kg IV Q8H  
-          (Community acquired 
01                                                                                                                                                                               
           Endocarditis  
                                                                                                                                                                                                              endocarditis 
● 
Native Valve                      Staph aureus                      I      Vancomycin 15 -20mg/kg IV Q8 -12H       +/-       Gentamicin 1mg/Kg IV Q8H            See overview of cardiac infections/infective 
#       Clinical Diagnosis        Aetiology                                 Empirical Antibiotic Therapy                                             Remarks 
Cardiac Infections – Initial Empiric Therapy 
 
 
----------------Page (70) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
64 | Page  
 
CVS
-                                                                  
0        Abiotrophia, or Gemella spp.
9
Vancomycin (15mg/kg IV Q12H for 4 weeks) 
 
μg/mL); Granulicatella,  
weeks) 
(MIC, ≥0.5 μg/mL and <8 
                                                                                                into equal doses Q8H for 6 
 
Penicillin Resistant;  
(2g IV OD) for 6 weeks                                                        IM as a single dose  or divided 
penicillin MICs of >0.1 μg/mL. 
● 
Streptococci-Moderately   Penicillin G (4-5 MU IV Q4H) or ceftriaxone      AND      Gentamicin (3mg/kg QID IV or           Preferred for PVE caused by streptococci with 
patients with non -immediate β-lactam allergy.  
CVS
Ceftriaxone alone or with gentamicin can be used in 
● 
Use vancomycin if unable to tolerate penicillins. 
-
0
 OR        Vancomycin (15mg/kg IV Q12H for 4 weeks) 
μg/mL. 
8
μg/mL) 
 
caused by streptococci with penicillin MICs  of ≤0.1 
weeks) 
(MIC >0.12 μg/mL and <0.5                                 weeks is preferred for prosthetic –valve endocarditis 
into equal doses Q8H for 2 
for 6 weeks or with gentamicin during the initial 2 
Penicillin Resistant                                                             
(2g IV OD) for 4 weeks                                                         IM, as a single dose or divided 
penicillin is unavailable. Penicillin alone at this dose 
● 
Streptococci-Relatively   Penicillin G (4 MU IV Q4H) or ceftriaxone           AND      Gentamicin (3 mg/kg QID IV or          Can use ampicillin or amoxicillin (2 g IV q4h) if 
weeks)                                                    acquired and requires Gram Negative coverage 
● 
                                                                                                                                                  Acute infective endocarditis is often hospital 2 weeks                                                                   into equal doses Q8H for 2 
CVS                                                                                                                                                                                                                      complicated endocarditis. 
OR        Q4H) or ceftriaxone (2g IV OD) for       AND      IM, as a single dose  or divided 
toxicity is increased and in prosthetic–valve or 
-                                                                                          Penicillin G (2-3 MU IV                                           Gentamicin (3mg/kg QID IV or 
● 
0                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Avoid 2-week regimen when risk of aminoglycoside 
7        (MIC ≤0.12 μg/mL) 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             immediate β-lactam allergy. 
OR        Vancomycin (15mg/kg IV Q12H for 4 weeks)                                                                ● 
Use vancomycin in patients with severe or 
S. gallolyticus                                                                                                                                                                          penicillin allergy. 
OR        Ceftriaxone 2g IV OD for 4 weeks)                                                                                  ●  Can use ceftriaxone in patients with non-immediate 
Susceptible,  
penicillin is unavailable. 
● 
Streptococci-Penicillin   Penicillin G (2–3 MU IV Q4H for 4 weeks)                                                                                        Can use ampicillin or amoxicillin (2 g IV q4h) if 
#                    Aetiology                                                         Antibiotic Therapy                                                             Remarks 
Cardiac Infections – Definitive Therapy 
 
----------------Page (71) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
65 | Page  
CVS
be used. 
 
-                                                                                       OR      Ampicillin/sulbactam 3 g IV q6h x 4 weeks 
● 
13                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             If the isolate is susceptible, ciprofloxacin (400 mg IV q12h) can 
dose. 
 
● 
HACEK Organisms                                   Ceftriaxone 2 g/d IV as a single dose x 4 weeks                                                                                         Can use another third -generation cephalosporin at comparable 
 
AND      Rifampicin 300mg PO Q8H x 6 -8 weeks 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
cefazolin can be substituted for cloxacillin, flucloxacillin.
AND      Gentamicin 1g/kg IM/IV Q8H x 2 weeks                                                                                       if β-lactam allergy is of the minor non  -immediate type, CVS
● 
 if patient is highly allergic to penicillin, use regimen for MRSA; 
MRSA infecting prosthetic valves        Vancomycin 15mg/kg IV Q12H x 6 -8 weeks                                                                                              susceptibility to gentamicin before initiating rifampicin.     -
12
● 
Use gentamicin during  the initial  2 weeks; determine 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MIC >1.0 or persistent bacteremia during vancomycin therapy.     
AND      Rifampicin 300 mg PO q8h x 6 –8 weeks 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                daptomycin treatment (see text) for MRSA with vancomycin 
                                                                                                                                                                        ●  No role for routine use of rifampin. Consider    high dose  
 
preferred.  
AND      Gentamicin 1 mg/kg IM or IV q8h x 2 weeks  
                                                                                                                                                                                 gentamicin, fusidic acid, or rifampin. A 6   -week course is 
or severe penicillin allergy; see text regarding addition of 
MSSA infecting prosthetic valves       Cloxacillin  or flucloxacillin 2 g IV q4h x 6–8 weeks 
● 
Only use vancomycin for patients with immediate (urticarial) 
penicillin allergy; 6 -week course preferred  
 
OR         Daptomycin 8-10mg/kg daily x 6 weeks 
● 
Can use cefazolin regimen for patients with non   -immediate 
foreign devices) 
CVS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (i.e., does not produce β-lactamase); 6 -week course preferred  
● 
Can use penicillin (4 mU q4h) if isolate is penicillin susceptible 
MRSA infecting native valves (no     Vancomycin 15mg/kg IV Q8H-Q12H 
 
-                                                                                                                                                                                                                       For Staphylococci
11
                                                                                                                                                                                                               OR        Vancomycin 15 mg/kg Q8-12H x 4–6 weeks 
 
 
nephrotoxicity (creatinine clearance rate <50 mL/min).
 
streptomycin or for patients at high risk for aminoglycoside 
OR        Cefazolin 2 g IV q8h x 4–6 weeks 
foreign devices)                                                                                                                                                        or without high -level resistance to gentamicin and 
● 
Use for ampicillin plus ceftriaxone for E. faecalis isolates with 
MSSA infecting native valves (no      Cloxacillin  or flucloxacillin 2 g IV q4h x 4–6 weeks 
resistant to penicillin/ampicillin.   
patients (preferable to desensitize to penicillin) and for isolates 
OR        Ampicillin 2g IV Q4H plus ceftriaxone 2g IV Q12H, both x 6 weeks                                     ●  Use vancomycin plus gentamicin only for penicillin   -allergic 
CVS
● 
Can use amoxicillin in lieu of ampicillin (same dose)     
not high -level re sistance to streptomycin   
-                                                                              OR        Vancomycin 15mg/kg Q12H plus gentamicin 1mg/kg IV Q8H, both x 6 weeks 
10
streptomycin (7.5 mg/kg q12h) in lieu of gentamicin if there is 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          abbreviate gentamicin course in some patients. Can use 
OR        Ampicillin 2g IV Q4H plus gentamicin 1mg/kg IV Q8H, both x 4–6 weeks 
NVE with >3 months of symptoms and all PVE for 6 weeks. Can 
● 
Can treat NVE for 4 weeks if symptoms last <3 months. Treat 
Enterococci                                              Penicillin G 4 -5 MU IV Q4H  plus gentamicin  1mg/kg IV Q8H, both x 4 –6 weeks                               For Enterococci  
#                     Aetiology                                                       Antibiotic Therapy                                                            Remarks 
Cardiac Infections – Definitive Therapy (continued) 
 
----------------Page (72) Break----------------

----------------Page (73) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
66 | Page  
                                                           
susceptible to the agent. Fluroquinolones are an excellent choice for susceptible pathogens.  
for 48 hours. The oral agent should have excellent bioavailability, and the isolate should be fully 
Oral switch may be considered in select patients who have defervesced and have remained afebrile 
sufficient.  
infection, uncontrolled source of infection, major immunocompromising condition), a 7-day course is 
to 72 hours and who do not have any of the complicating factors (endovascular, bone, joint, or CNS 
For patients with uncomplicated Enterobacterales bacteraemia who show clinical improvement in 48 
Gram Negative bacteria                                                                            3 weeks 
Listeria                                                                                                         3 weeks 
Group B Streptococcus                                                                             3 weeks 
Pneumococcus                                                                                           10 to 14 days 
Meningococcus and H. influenzae                                                          7 days 
Meningitis, uncomplicated (pathogen identified):                                               
Meningitis, uncomplicated                                                                                      10 to 14 days 
Surgical antibiotic prophylaxis                                                                                 Single dose 
 
Secondary peritonitis, with source control  
4 to 7 days 
Skin and Soft tissue infections                                                                                 5 days 
Catheter associated UTI                                                                                           7 to 10 days 
(fluoroquinolones: 5 to 7 days, cotrimoxazole, beta lactams:7 to 10 days)     
Pyelonephritis                                                                                                            5 to 10 days 
FQ   fluoroquinolone 
Males: FQ 5 days, cotrimoxazole 7 days, beta lactams 7 days 
Females: FQ 3 days, cotrimoxazole 3 days, beta lactams 5 to 7 days               3 to 7 days 
Depends on gender and class of antibiotic, longer for males 
Cystitis 
Ventilator associated pneumonia                                                                           7 days 
Hospital acquired pneumonia                                                                                 7 days 
Community acquired pneumonia                                                                           5 to 7 days 
Staphylococcal aureus bacteraemia with high risk of complications                4 to 6 weeks 
Staphylococcal aureus bacteraemia with low risk of complications                 2 weeks 
apply for CRBSI                                                                                                           conditions)1 
Gram negative bacteraemia, without complicating factors, does not 7 days (see 
(conditions apply) 
Infectious syndrome 
Duration of therapy 
Duration of  ntibiotic therapy  
XVI.  Duration of  ntimicrobial Therapy 
 
----------------Page (74) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
67 | Page  
 
Conversion                            1 mg = 10,000 units             1 mg CBA = 2.4 mg CMS = 30,000 IU CMS 
impairment/RRT 
Dosing in renal                           No adjustment required       Adjustment required 
ideal body weight) 
0.4
(Body weight > 30% above       (ABW    ) * 
Dosing in obese individuals      Use adjusted body weight     Use ideal body weight (IBW)* 
11 million units) 
Q12H                                  based dosing table; maximal dose per day is 
Maintenance dose                 12,500 to 15,000 units/kg     4.5 million units Q12H (but see weight-
units 
Loading dose                         20,000 to 25,000 units/kg    1,20,000 IU per kg; maximal is 9 million 
Polymyxin B                        Colistin 
 
administration by nebulization should be considered for treatment of pneumonia  
For both the polymyxins, treatment of CNS infection requires adjunctive intrathecal therapy; 
polymyxin urinary concentrations are low. 
For UTI, colistin is preferred over polymyxin B; colistin achieves high urinary concentrations but 
agent.  
administered as the active agent, whereas colistin is a prodrug that has to be converted to the active 
Polymyxin B achieves adequate plasma levels more rapidly and reliably than colistin. Polymyxin B is 
pharmacokinetics, no need for dose adjustment in renal impairment and lower risk of renal toxicity. 
efficacy, faster attainment of target serum concentrations, less inter -patient variability in 
For all indications other than UTI,  Polymyxin B is preferred over colistin  because of equivalent 
•    Adjunctive inhalation therapy for pneumonia caused by MDR gram -negative bacilli. 
•    Urinary tract infections  
Polymyxin B is generally preferred over colistin for all indications with the following exceptions.  
Prevotella, and Fusobacterium spp  
intrinsically resistant to polymyxins. Organisms with variable resistance include Aeromonas, Vibrio, 
Serratia marcescens, Morganella morganii, Burkholderia cepacia, Moraxella catarrhalis are all 
The following organisms are intrinsically resistant to polymyxins. Proteus spp, Providencia spp, 
Resistant organisms:  
resistance to polymyxins  
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia strains. However, acquried resistance in these organisms may lead to 
pertussis, Legionella pneumophila, Salmonella spp, Shigella spp, and the majority of 
Acinetobacter baumannii. Other susceptible organisms include Haemophilus influenzae, Bordetella 
Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, some Enterobacter spp, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and 
Susceptible organisms: 
nervous system. They are not effective against many Gram-negative pathogens. 
Generally, both the polymyxins show poor penetration into the lungs, pleura, bones, and central 
There are two polymyxin antibiotics: Colistin also called as Polymyxin E, and Polymyxin B. 
1.  Polymy ins dosing 
XVII.  ntibiotic Dosing for selected antimicrobials  
 
----------------Page (75) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
68 | Page  
                                                           
dose for a patient receiving 10 hours of SLED would be 260 mg (divided q12h).   
Add 10% (of 130 mg) per hour of SLED to the the baseline daily dose of 130 mg. Example: the daily 
SLED       
suggested daily dose is 442 mg (divided q12h).  
Add 10% (of 130 mg) per hour of CRRT to the baseline daily dose of 130 mg. Thus, after 24 hrs the 
CRRT      
the extracorp oreal system.  
as late as possible within a CMS dosage interval to minimize the amount of colistin and CMS lost to 
administered with the next regular dose, after the dialysis session has ended. Conduct IHD sessions 
respectively. If possible, the supplement to the ba  seline (non-dialysis) daily dose should be 
day, administer a supplemental dose of 1.2 million IU or 1.6 million IU for a 3  - or 4-hour IHD session, 
On a non -dialysis day, administer a CMS dose of 130 mg CBA/day (~3.95 million IU/day). On a dialysis 
Patients on intermittent HD  
weight)  
0.4
calculating creatinine clearance.  ABW    = ideal body weight + 40% of (total body weight  – ideal body 
Creatinine clearance calculated using Cockcroft and Gault formula.   Use adjusted body weight for 
 
cDaily dose administered in two divided dosed 12 hours apart. 
bAdjusted body weight should be used to estimate creatinine clearance. 
creatinine clearance. Reproduced from reference 6 with minor modifications. 
ss,avg
aTo achieve a desired target plasma colistin C of 2 mg/L for patients with narrow windows of 
concentration;  
ss,avg
CBA  colistin base activity; CMS  colistin methanesulfonate; C   average steady-state plasma 
> 90                                                  360                                                        10.90 
80 to < 90                                            340                                                        10.30 
70 to < 80                                            300                                                          9.00 
60 to < 70                                            275                                                          8.35 
50 to < 60                                            245                                                          7.40 
40 to < 50                                            220                                                          6.65 
30 to < 40                                            195                                                          5.90 
20 to < 30                                            175                                                          5.30 
10 to < 20                                            160                                                          4.85 
5 to < 10                                              145                                                          4.40 
0                                                    130                                                          3.95 
mL/minuteb 
mg CBA/day                                          Million IU/day 
Creatinine clearance 
ss,avg
Daily dose of CMS for plasma colistin C  of 2 mg/ Lc 
 
Dosing in renal impairment 
*Reference: Pharmacotherapy 2017;37(11):1415–1431. 
0.4
Body Weight.  ABW    = ideal body weight + 40% of (total body weight – ideal body weight). 
CBA: colistin base activity; CMS: colistin methane sulfonate; IBW: Ideal Body Weight ; ABW: Adjusted 
 
----------------Page (76) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
69 | Page  
                                                           
 
 
with systemic therapy 
therapy. Colistin: 4.2 mg CBA/day = 10 mg CMS/day = 1,25,000 IU/day, once daily, in combination 
minutes after administration. Polymyxin B: 50,000 IU once daily, in combination with systemic 
When an intraventricular dose is administered via a ventricular drain, clamp drain for 15 to 60 
Use preservative free solution of the drug  
organisms; adjunct to systemic therapy) 
Intrathecal and intraventricular therapy for meningitis and ventriculitis (susceptible gram-negative 
conventional humidifier) for each nebulisation may increase the lung delivery.  
humidifier is not mandatory. However, using a dry inspiratory circuit (HME filter instead of 
should be avoided by administering a short propofol sedation. Turning off the conventional 
2
positive-end expiratory pressure 5–10 cmH O; asynchronies between the patient and the ventilator 
and spontaneous breathing), respiratory frequency 12–15/min, I/E=1:2, inspiratory pause 20%, 
deposition: Controlled ventilation with 40 l/min constant inspiratory flow (avoid pressure support 
Ventilator settings should be optimized during the nebulization phase to reduce extrapulmonary 
Optimizing ventilator settings for nebulisation (Rouby et al (2022)) 
dose for 70 kg person should be 3 million IU or 300 mg per dose (Rouby et al (2022)) 
recommended epithelial lining fluid concentrations at 20 μ/ml 8 h after nebulisation. The optimal 
studies indicate that 41200 IU per kg (4.12 mg/kg) Q8H is the optimal dose to achieve the 
have used doses up to 25,000 IU/kg or 2.5 mg/kg per day per day for inhalation. Ex vivo PK/PD 
Dose not well defined. 5,00,000 units (0.5 million IU) or 50mg, every 12 hours (UpToDate). Studies 
Polymyxin B  
mg every 8 hours have been described (As per UpToDate) 
(As per Sanford). 2.25 to 4.5 million IU or 75 to 150 mg CBA Q12H, every 12 hours; doses up to 167 
1.5 to 2.25 million IU or 50-75 mg CBA in 3-4 mL saline via vibrating mesh nebulizer 2-3 times/day 
Colistin:  
either colistin or polymyxin B is appropriate (weak recommendation, very low-quality evidence) 
recommendation, low-quality evidence). It is recommended that for polymyxin aerosol therapy, 
gram-negative HAP or VAP should receive adjunctive polymyxin aerosol therapy (weak 
It is recommended that patients requiring IV polymyxin therapy for suspected or documented XDR 
As per International Consensus Guidelines for the Optimal Use of the Polymyxins (Tsuji et all 2019). 
Inhalation therapy:  
 
----------------Page (77) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
70 | Page  
 
clearance less than 50) 
Renal impairment: Avoid this approach in those with advanced renal impairment as well (creatinine 
Pregnancy: Once daily approach is generally not recommended in pregnancy  
their body surface area, cystic fibrosis, endocarditis. 
Adults: Once daily approach is not recommended in patients with ascites, burns covering >20% of 
months of age because of decreases in drug clearance at this age.  
Children: Use of once daily approach is generally not recommended in children younger than three 
Once daily approach should be avoided in whom? 
 
recommended in certain indications and certain populations.  
daily approach is the preferred approach in most situations. However, this approach is not well 
Once daily approach has been shown to be possibly more effective and possibly less toxic. So once 
intervals.  
persists for a long period even after the plasma level has fallen below the MIC, thus allowing longer 
ratio. In addition, aminoglycosides have a prolonged post-antibiotic effect; the bactericidal effect 
ratio. Once daily approach achieves higher peak concentration (Cmax) and hence higher Cmax/MIC 
Aminoglycosides are concentration dependent antibiotics. Their efficacy is related to the Cmax/MIC 
Which approach is preferred? 
 
 The total daily dose of 15 to 20 mg/kg is given as a single dose.  
Once daily approach (also called extended interval dosing approach) 
7.5mg/kg Q12H ) 
The total daily dose of 15 to 20 mg/kg is given as two or three divided doses (5mg/kg Q8H or 
Traditional approach (also called multiple daily dose approach).  
What are the two approaches to aminoglycoside doing? (using amikacin for example) 
 
aminoglycosides in vitro, they should not be mixed in the same solution. 
intermittent and at least 60 minutes for extended-interval dosing. Because beta-lactams inactivate 
Intravenous administration of aminoglycosides should occur over at least 30 minutes for traditional 
Administration  
  
(This formula can be used only for those who are 5 feet or more in height)  
Females: IBW = 45.5 kg + 2.3 kg for each inch over 5 feet. 
Males: IBW = 50 kg + 2.3 kg for each inch over 5 feet. 
Ideal Body Weight (IBW) formula:  
  
ABW is equal to IBW plus 40% of the excess weight.  
Excess body weight is TBW minus IBW.  
Adjusted body weight is obtained by adding 40% of the excess body weight to ideal body weight. 
ABW = IBW + 0.4 (TBW minus IBW) 
Adjusted Body Weight (ABW) 
  
Note: actual body weight is also known as total body weight or TBW 
1.25 times the IBW), use adjusted body weight.  
But, if the actual body weight (TBW) exceeds ideal body weight by more than 25 % (that is TBW > 
If the patient is underweight, normal weight or only moderately overweight, use actual body weight. 
It depends on the body weight category.  
body weight or adjusted body weight? 
Which body weight to is to be used for aminoglycoside dose calculation:  actual body weight, ideal 
2.   minoglycoside dosing 
 
----------------Page (78) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
71 | Page  
                                                      
Periodically check peak and trough serum levels. 
 
before dialysis and the extra 3.75 mg/kg after dialysis.  
If the q48h dose is due on a dialysis day, give the 7.5 mg/kg dose 
 
dialysis (AD)  
Haemodialysis          7.5 mg/kg q48h. In addition, give an extra dose of 3.75 mg/kg after 
CrCl < 10               7.5 mg/kg q48h 
CrCl 10 - 49            7.5 mg/kg q24h 
CrCl ≥ 50               7.5 mg/kg q12h 
CrCl (mL/min)                                                 Initial dosing interval 
  
For traditional approach  
 
< 50                                    Follow traditional dosing approach as per the table below 
≥50                                                                          15mg/kg Q24H 
CrCl (mL/min)                                                    Initial dosing interval 
 
For once daily approach  
 
Dose adjustment in renal failure 
 
----------------Page (79) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
72 | Page  
distributed into tissues and body fluids including intestinal mucosa, gallbladder, lung, female 
Protein binding of the tazobactam metabolite is negligible. Piperacillin and tazobactam are widely 
binding of either piperacillin or tazobactam is unaffected by the presence of the other compound. 
Both piperacillin and tazobactam are approximately 30% bound to plasma proteins. The protein 
achieved in the serum immediately following completion of 30-minute infusion.  
Piperacillin (in combination with tazobactam) is excreted mainly in the urine. Peak concentrations are 
Pharmacokinetics 
No dosage adjustment necessary. 
Dosing in liver disease or biliary obstruction  
 
every 6 hours 
<20                6.75 to 9g                  2.25 g every 8 hours 
4.5 g every 12 hours or 2.25 g 
every 6 hours 
20 to <40           9 to 13.5g                  2.25 g every 6 hours 
4.5 g every 8 hours or 3.375 g 
40 to <100        13.5 to 18 g               3.375 g every 6 hours                          4.5 g every 6 hours 
every 6 hours                                           6 hours 
100 to <130       13.5 to 18 g 
3.375 infused over 4 hours 4.5 g infused over 4 hours every 
(mL/minute)        per day                3.375 g every 6 hours                     4.5 g every 6 hours 
CrCl   Total dose If the recommended dose is If the recommended dose is 
Piperacillin Tazobactam requires dose adjustment in renal failure: 
Dosing in renal impairment  
 
•    2.25-gram Piperacillin Tazobactam, containing 2-gram Piperacillin and 250 mg tazobactam 
•    4.5-gram Piperacillin Tazobactam, containing 4-gram Piperacillin and 500 mg tazobactam 
Piperacillin Tazobactam combination is available in two dosage formulations. 
Piperacillin Tazobactam product availability:  
Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection, given as 4 divided doses 
•    Severe infection (Maximal daily dose) : 18 g per day, usually in 3 divided doses, in case of 
•    Mild to moderate infection: 13.5 g per day, in 4 divided doses 
Daily dosing 
increased. 
infections caused by less sensitive organisms, the total daily dose and/or frequency may be 
divided doses every 6 to 8 hours. Traditionally each dose is given over 30 mins. In severe infections or 
The usual adult daily dose of cefoperazone is 13.5 to 18 grams per day administered in equally 
Dose of Piperacillin- Tazobactam 
Adult doses are expressed as the combined amount of piperacillin and tazobactam. 
3. Piperacillin-Tazobactam dosing 
 
----------------Page (80) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
73 | Page  
                                                           
and tazobactam and vancomycin. 
incidence of acute kidney injury. Monitor kidney function in patients receiving piperacillin 
•    Co-administration of piperacillin and tazobactam with vancomycin may increase the 
risk. 
administered with piperacillin and tazobactam for injection unless the benefit outweighs the 
•    Probenecid prolongs the half-lives of piperacillin and tazobactam and should not be co-
Caution  
warrant dosage adjustment of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection due to hepatic cirrhosis. 
in patients with hepatic cirrhosis compared to healthy subjects. However, this difference does not 
The half-life of piperacillin and of tazobactam increases by approximately 25% and 18%, respectively, 
metabolite.  
tazobactam doses, respectively, with up to 16% of the tazobactam dose removed as the tazobactam 
metabolite. Peritoneal dialysis removes approximately 6% and 21% of the piperacillin and 
tazobactam dose with an additional 5% of the tazobactam dose removed as the tazobactam 
piperacillin and tazobactam for injection. Hemodialysis removes 30% to 40% of a piperacillin and 
creatinine clearance is below 40 mL/min in patients receiving the usual recommended daily dose of 
clearance. Dosage adjustments for piperacillin and tazobactam for injection are recommended when 
impairment, the half-life of piperacillin and of tazobactam increases with decreasing creatinine 
After the administration of single doses of piperacillin and tazobactam to subjects with renal 
secreted into the bile. 
remainder as the single metabolite. Piperacillin, tazobactam and desethyl piperacillin are also 
primarily by renal excretion with 80% of the administered dose excreted as unchanged drug and the 
68% of the administered dose excreted in the urine. Tazobactam and its metabolite are eliminated 
glomerular filtration and tubular secretion. Piperacillin is excreted rapidly as unchanged drug with 
dose or duration of infusion. Both piperacillin and tazobactam are eliminated via the kidney by 
plasma half-life of piperacillin and of tazobactam ranges from 0.7 to 1.2 hours and is unaffected by 
Following single or multiple piperacillin and tazobactam for injection doses to healthy subjects, the 
metabolized to a single metabolite that lacks pharmacological and antibacterial activities.  
Piperacillin is metabolized to a minor microbiologically active desethyl metabolite. Tazobactam is 
as with other penicillin.  
piperacillin and tazobactam into cerebrospinal fluid is low in subjects with non-inflamed meninges, 
reproductive tissues (uterus, ovary, and fallopian tube), interstitial fluid, and bile. Distribution of 
 
----------------Page (81) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
74 | Page  
with plain CPZ 1g Q6H 
8g                        2 to 4g                                                                                    CPZ-SBT 3g Q6H 
CPZ-SBT 2g Q6H 
with plain CPZ 1g Q12H                          CPZ 1g Q12H 
6g                        2 to 4g 
CPZ-SBT 2g Q6H                    CPZ-SBT 3g Q12H with plain 
4g                        2 to 4g                         CPZ-SBT 2g Q6H                             CPZ-SBT 3g Q12H 
3g                        2 to 4g                         CPZ-SBT 2g Q8H                                             
2g                        2 to 4g                        CPZ-SBT 2g Q12H                                            
dose per day       dose per day 
Using 1:1 ratio product             Using 2:1 ratio product 
Desired CPZ  Desired SBT 
 djusting the dose of the combination for varying intended doses of cefoperazone 
creatinine clearance less than 15.  
The dose of sulbactam should not exceed 2g for creatinine clearance of 15 to 30 and 1g for for 
< 15                  1g per day (500 mg Q12H) 
15 to 30                   2g per day (1g Q12H) 
> 30          2 to 4 g per day (up to 12 g per day) 
CrCl                                  Dose 
Sulbactam dose in renal failure  
adjustment in renal failure. 
Cefoperazone does not require dose adjustment in renal failure. However, sulbactam requires dose 
Dosing in renal impairment  
with cefoperazone 1g and sulbactam 500 mg) 
2.   2:1 ratio (Example: Magnex 3g with cefoperazone 2g and sulbactam 1g and Magnex 1.5 g 
with 500 mg each of cefoperazone and sulbactam) 
1.   1:1 ratio (Example: Magnex 2g with 1 g each of cefoperazone and sulbactam  and Magnex 1g 
Cefoperazone sulbactam combination is available in two ratios: 
Cefoperazone sulbactam (CPZ-SBT) product availability 
Acinetobacter infections. 
Usual dose of sulbactam is 2 to 4 gram per day. Doses up to 12 g per day have been used in 
Dose of sulbactam  
avoided in liver disease or biliary obstruction). 
used in serious infections and infections with relatively resistant organisms (higher dose should be 
Usual daily dose is 2 to 4 g per day. Maximal daily dose is 6 to 12 g per day. Higher doses should be 
dose. 
daily dosage of 6–12 grams divided into 2, 3 or 4 administrations ranging from 1.5 to 4 grams per 
daily dose and/or frequency may be increased. Patients have been successfully treated with a total 
doses every 12 hours. In severe infections or infections caused by less sensitive organisms, the total 
The usual adult daily dose of cefoperazone is 2 to 4 grams per day administered in equally divided 
Dose of cefoperazone (as per package insert of Pfizer)  
4.  Cefoperazone sulbactam (CPZ-SBT) dosing 
 
----------------Page (82) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
75 | Page  
volunteers.  
lives in patients with severe renal insufficiency are not significantly different from those in normal 
drug in normal subjects. Peak serum concentrations, areas under the curve (AUC’s), and serum half-
Repeated administration of cefoperazone at 12-hour intervals does not result in accumulation of the 
12-hour period averages 20–30%. No significant quantity of metabolites has been found in the urine. 
Following a single intramuscular or intravenous dose, the urinary recovery of cefoperazone over a 
concentrations by up to 100 times. 
between one and three hours following drug administration and exceed concurrent serum 
Cefoperazone is excreted mainly in the bile. Maximum bile concentrations are generally obtained 
Pharmacokinetics 
cefaperazone should not exceed 1–2g daily without close monitoring of serum concentrations. 
In patients with combined hepatic dysfunction and significant renal disease, the dosage of 
Dosing in combined hepatic dysfunction and significant renal disease,  
 
plain CPZ 2.5g Q12H            plain CPZ 2g Q12H 
6g                       1 g              CPZ-SBT 1g Q12H with CPZ-SBT 1.5g Q12H with 
plain CPZ 1.5g Q12H            plain CPZ 1g Q12H 
4g                       1 g              CPZ-SBT 1g Q12H with CPZ-SBT 1.5g Q12H with 
< 15                                                                        plain CPZ 0.5g Q12H 
CrCl:                        2g                       1 g              CPZ-SBT 1g Q12H with CPZ-SBT 1.5 g Q12H  
plain CPZ 3g Q12H               plain CPZ 2g Q12H 
8g                       2 g              CPZ-SBT 2g Q12H with CPZ-SBT 3g Q12H with 
plain CPZ 2g Q12H               plain CPZ 1g Q12H 
6g                       2 g              CPZ-SBT 2g Q12H with CPZ-SBT 3g Q12H with 
plain CPZ 1g Q12H 
15 to 30                  4g                       2 g              CPZ-SBT 2g Q12H with CPZ-SBT 3g Q12H  
CrCl:                        2g                       2 g              CPZ-SBT 2g Q12H                   
day 
clearance    dose per  SBT per day     product                              product  
Cr.    Desired CPZ Maximal   Using 1:1 ratio   Using 2:1 ratio 
cefoperazone? 
How will you adjust the dose of CFP-SBT in renal impairment for varying intended doses of 
Dosing in renal impairment  
monitored. 
should not be necessary in such patients. If higher dosages are used, serum concentrations should be 
in patients with hepatic disease and/or biliary obstruction. In general, total daily dosage above 4 g 
Cefoperazone is extensively excreted in bile. The serum half-life of cefoperazone is increased 2–4 fold 
Dosing in liver disease or biliary obstruction  
the above approach.  
If you want to give higher doses of sulbactam (up to 12 g per day) the dose may be adjusted using 
 
 
----------------Page (83) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
76 | Page  
                                                      
is liver disease or biliary obstruction or renal impairment or both. 
CPZ-SBT therapy may prolong INR. Monitoring is indicated when high doses are used or when there 
Caution  
not exceed 1–2 g daily without close monitoring of serum concentrations. 
In patients with both hepatic dysfunction and significant renal disease, cefoperazone dosage should 
evidence of accumulation exists, dosage should be decreased accordingly. 
cefoperazone are used, concentrations of drug in the serum should be monitored periodically. If 
failure require no adjustment in dosage when usual doses are administered. When high doses of 
Because renal excretion is not the main route of elimination of cefoperazone, patients with renal 
monitored. 
should not be necessary in such patients. If higher dosages are used, serum concentrations should be 
in patients with hepatic disease and/or biliary obstruction. In general, total daily dosage above 4g 
Cefoperazone is extensively excreted in bile. The serum half-life of cefoperazone is increased 2–4 fold 
in the serum. 
increased. In patients with combined renal and hepatic insufficiencies, cefoperazone may accumulate 
In patients with hepatic dysfunction, the serum half-life is prolonged and urinary excretion is 
 
----------------Page (84) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
77 | Page  
Males: IBW = 50 kg + 2.3 kg for each inch over 5 feet. 
Ideal Body Weight (IBW) formula 
ABW is equal to IBW plus 40% of the excess weight.  
Excess body weight is TBW minus IBW.  
Adjusted body weight is obtained by adding 40% of the excess body weight to ideal body weight. 
ABW = IBW + 0.4 (TBW minus IBW) 
Adjusted Body Weight (ABW) 
  
Note: actual body weight is also known as total body weight or TBW 
body weight by more than 25 % (that is TBW > 1.25 times the IBW), use adjusted body weight.  
moderately overweight, use actual body weight. But, if the actual body weight (TBW) exceeds ideal 
It depends on the body weight category. If the patient is underweight, normal weight or only 
body weight or adjusted body weight? 
Which body weight to is to be used for vancomycin dose calculation:  actual body weight, ideal 
  
ratio target is 400–600 mg h/L.  
tissue infection). However, AUC/MIC ratio guided dosing is now preferred. Recommended AUC/MIC 
A target trough of 10 to 15 mcg/mL is warranted for patients with non-severe infection (such as soft 
hospitalization, infection involving the central nervous system, or infection causing critical illness).  
(such as bacteraemia, endocarditis, osteomyelitis, prosthetic joint infection, pneumonia warranting 
concentration of 15 to 20 mcg/mL is warranted for patients with severe or deep-seated infection 
Traditionally vancomycin dose has been guided by trough levels. A target serum trough 
Use of vancomycin plasma levels to guide therapy 
 
adjustments 
dose and interval                      guided serum concentration monitoring. 
Subsequent maintenance       Based on AUC-guided (preferred for severe infection) or trough-
                                                     increment). 
and interval                                (based on actual body weight, rounded to the nearest 250 mg 
Initial maintenance dose         Typically, 15 to 20 mg/kg every 8 to 12 hours for most patients 
If facility for vancomycin drug levels is available:  
 
infections. 
Use a maintenance dose of 15 mg/kg Q12H for non-serious infections and 15mg/kg 8H for serious 
If facility for vancomycin drug levels is not available: 
Maintenance dose  
  
body weight) 
Use actual body weight for dose calculation; in the obese patients alone, use adjusted 
following: age ≥60, patients with risk factors for acute kidney injury.  
dose        Within this range, use higher per kg dose in critically ill and a lower per kg dose in the 
Loading  Load 20 to 35 mg/kg (rounded to the nearest 250 mg increment; not to exceed 3000 mg).  
  
prosthetic joint infection, pneumonia warranting hospitalization, or infection causing critical illness. 
Severe S. aureus infections include (but are not limited to) bacteraemia, endocarditis, osteomyelitis, 
aureus infection) 
(Loading dose is recommended only for patients with known or suspected severe Staphylococcus 
Loading dose  
5.  Vancomycin dosing 
 
----------------Page (85) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
78 | Page  
                                                           
required in patients with residual renal function. 
mg/kg IV post-dialysis to maintain serum concentrations within goal range. Higher doses may be 
15 - 20 mg/kg, then re-dose based on serum concentrations. Most individuals will require 5 - 10 
Dosing in Haemodialysis 
* Lower the clearance within this range, use lower per kg dose for that range 
CrCl  < 15*                                           10-20 mg/kg q48h 
CrCl  15 to 49*                                        10-20 mg/kg q24h 
CrCl  50 to 100                                        15-20 mg/kg q12h 
CrCl  > 100                                         15-20 mg/kg q8-12h 
CrCl (mL/min)                                         Dosing interval 
 
should be guided by vancomycin levels. 
(Based on UpToDate, John Hopkins Guide and Sanford Guide). Guidelines recommend that dosing 
Vancomycin dose adjustment in renal failure  
 
following infusion of vancomycin), a slower infusion rate or reduction in dose is warranted. 
For patients who develop infusion reaction (histamine-mediated flushing during or immediately 
mg/minute (e.g., 500 mg over at least 1/2 h; 1000 mg over at least 1 hour, etc.).  
may be used if there is a need to restrict fluids. The rate of infusion should not exceed 10 to 15 
Vancomycin should be diluted to a concentration of 5 mg/mL or less; concentrations up to 10mg/mL 
Infusion concentration and infusion rate 
  
of acute kidney injury. 
Concurrent treatment with aminoglycosides or piperacillin-tazobactam further potentiates the risk 
  
failure, and overdosage increases the risk of nephrotoxicity. 
Vancomycin has a narrow therapeutic window. Underdosage increases the probability of clinical 
Importance of accurate dosing  
  
(This formula can be used only for those who are 5 feet or more in height)  
Females: IBW = 45.5 kg + 2.3 kg for each inch over 5 feet. 
 
----------------Page (86) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
79 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
Dirty                                                 7.1 to 40.0 % 
 
Contaminated                                6.4 to 15.2 % 
Clean-contaminated                        2.4 to 7.7 % 
 
Clean                                                  1.3 to 2.9 % 
 
 
SSI rates according to wound class were: 
Several studies have found a moderate correlation between the wound classification and the SSI rate. 
 
contamination or wounds that involve existing clinical infection or perforated viscus. 
Dirty wounds are old traumatic wounds with retained devitalized tissue, foreign bodies, or fecal 
encountered also were included in this category. 
technique, or gross spillage from a viscus. Wounds in which acute, nonpurulent inflammation was 
Contaminated wounds are open, fresh accidental wounds, operations with major breaks in sterile 
or urinary tract) is entered under controlled conditions and without unusual contamination. 
Clean-contaminated wounds are operative wounds in which a viscus (respiratory, alimentary, genital, 
not entered during a clean procedure. 
wound is closed primarily. By definition, a viscus (respiratory, alimentary, genital, or urinary tract) is 
Clean wounds are uninfected operative wounds in which no inflammation is encountered and the 
Wound classification: 
The purpose is to prevent the development of infection at the surgical site (surgical site infection). 
Purpose of surgical antibiotic prophyla is: 
Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America (SHEA). 
American Society of Health-System Pharmacists (ASHP) 
Surgical Infection Society (SIS) 
Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) 
This practice guideline is endorsed by the following organizations  
Endorsement:  
Feb;14(1):73-156. doi: 10.1089/sur.2013.9999. 
Clinical practice guidelines for antimicrobial prophyla is in surgery. Surg Infect (Larchmt). 2013 
susceptibility patterns seen in India. 
This annexure is based on the following practice guidelines but adapted as per antimicrobial 
XVIII. Surgical  ntibiotic Prophyla is 
 
----------------Page (87) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
80 | Page  
                                                           
There is no need to administer the antibiotic once the surgery has been completed. 
the levels should be maintained above MIC throughout the duration of the procedure. 
concentrations of the antibiotic exceeds the MIC of organisms at the time of incision and 
2.   The timing of administration of the antibiotic should ensure that serum and tissue 
1.   The antibiotic chosen should cover the pathogens likely to cause surgical site infection   
Successful prophylaxis requires that  
Choice and the timing of the antibiotic: 
predominant organisms include gram-negative rods and enterococci in addition to skin flora.  
procedures, including abdominal procedures and heart, kidney, and liver transplantations, the 
and coagulase-negative staphylococci (e.g., Staphylococcus epidermidis). In clean-contaminated 
The predominant organisms causing SSIs after clean procedures are skin flora, including S. aureus 
Pathogens causing surgical site infection: 
 
End of procedure assessment of wound class 
 
----------------Page (88) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
81 | Page  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
replacement) 
major blood loss). The dose should be repeated after for every 1500 ml blood loss (after fluid 
considered after fluid replacement. (>1,500 ml in adults, children >25ml/kg in children is considered 
In the event of major intraoperative blood loss additional dosage of prophylactic antibiotic should be 
antibiotic effect.  
Despite short half-life, aminoglycosides do not need redosing, because they have prolonged post-
Antibiotics with long half-life such as vancomycin do not need redosing.  
No further doses are required once the surgery is completed. 
tazobactam has a half-life of 1 hour and should be given every 2 hours.  
For example, cefazolin has a half-life of 2 hours, and it should be given every 4 hours, piperacillin 
interval of approximately two times the half-life of the agent in patients with normal renal function. 
For antimicrobials with a short half-life (redosing in the operating room is recommended at an 
and not from the time of surgical incision and not from the beginning of the procedure.  
burns). The redosing interval should be calculated from the time of administration of the first dose 
warranted if there are factors that shorten the half-life of the antimicrobial agent (e.g., extensive 
Redosing is also required in the event of major intraoperative blood loss. Redosing may also be 
Redosing required depending on the duration of the surgery and the half-life to the drug chosen. 
Redosing of the antibiotic: 
starting the infusions earlier.  
long half-lives, and they are likely to sustain the levels above MIC for the period of surgery despite 
started not earlier than 120 minutes prior to the expected time of surgical incision. These drugs have 
prolonged infusion over 1 to 2 hours, such as vancomycin or fluoroquinolones, the infusion should be 
levels of the antibiotic is present in the tissues at the time of skin incision. For antibiotics requiring 
administration infusion should be completed before the surgical incision to ensure that therapeutic 
be started not earlier than 60 minutes of expected time of surgical incision. The antibiotic 
For antibiotics that are given as IV push over 3 to 5 minutes or as short infusion, the infusion should 
Timing of the antibiotic: 
 
----------------Page (89) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
82 | Page  
                                                           
Metronidazole: infuse over 10 minutes. 
Clindamycin: infuse over 10-20 minutes. 
Ciprofloxacin: infuse over 60 minutes 
Vancomycin: infuse over 60 minutes; start at least 30 minutes before incision 
all reach adequate skin levels within minutes--hence can be given just before surgery. 
β-lactams (cephalosporins, ampicillin/sulbactam, piperacillin tazobactam): IV push over 3-5 minutes; 
Infusion times for antibiotics: 
of drug-resistant organisms, superinfections, and drug toxicity   
indwelling catheters are removed cannot be supported due to concerns regarding the development 
prophylaxis. The practice of continuing antimicrobial prophylaxis until all invasive lines, drains, and 
days only in case of dirty or infected wounds. However, this is treatment of infection and not 
it should not be continued beyond 24 hours. Pre-operative antibiotic should be continued for several 
Surgical antibiotic prophylaxis should be generally limited to the duration of the surgery. At any cost, 
Duration of antibiotic prophyla is: 
 
----------------Page (90) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
83 | Page  
 
> 100 kg   1.5 g 
71-99 kg   1.25g 
< 70 kg   1g 
Vancomycin          15 mg/kg                          15 mg/kg                               4–8             12 
component 
of the piperacillin 
≤40 kg: 100 mg/kg 
Children >9 mo and 
component 
piperacillin 
tazobactam                                                     mg/kg of the 
Piperacillin/          3.375 g                             Infants 2–9 mo: 80  0.7–1.2          2 
mg/kg dose 
receive a single 7.5-
< 1200 g should 
Neonates weighing 
Metronidazole     500 mg IV                         15 mg/kg                               6–8             12 
(single dose) 
dosing weight                  dosing weight                                           required 
Gentamicind         5 mg/kg based on  2.5 mg/kg based on  2–3             Redosing not 
required 
Fluconazole          400 mg                             6 mg/kg                                   30              Redosing not 
required 
Ertapenem           1 g                                     15 mg/kg                               3–5             Redosing not 
≥ 100 kg: 900 mg 
Clindamycin         < 100 kg: 600 mg            10 mg/kg                               2–4             6 
required 
Ciprofloxacin c      400 mg IV                         10 mg/kg                               3–7             Redosing not 
required 
Ceftriaxone           2 gb                                    50–75 mg/kg                    5.4–10.9         Redosing not 
sulbactam                                                                                                  1 for sulb.       (inadequate data)  
Cefoperazone- 2 g                                                                                2 for cefo.       Every 2 to 4 hours 
≥100 kg                                                                                                 2h) 
3 g for pts weighing               (Cardiac surgery q 
Cefazolin               2 g,                                    30 mg/kg                            1.2–2.2          4 
g/sulbactam 1 g)             component 
sulbactam             (ampicillin 2    ampicillin 
Ampicillin/            3 g                                     50 mg/kg of the   0.8–1.3          2 
function 
(in hours)           normal renal 
Function             Dose), assuming a 
Renal    Preoperative 
order)                                                                                                       Normal   (From Initiation of 
(alphabetical                     dults with  Redosing Interval 
 ntimicrobial       dults                               Pediatricsa                    Half-life in  Recommended 
Prophyla is  dapted from  SHP/IDS /SIS/SHE  2013 Guideline 
Recommended Doses and Redosing Intervals for Commonly  sed  ntimicrobials for Surgical 
 ntibiotics commonly used in surgical antibiotic prophyla is 
 
----------------Page (91) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
84 | Page  
                                                           
 
 
 
•    John Hopkins ABX guide 
prophylaxis in surgery. Am J Health Syst Pharm. 2013;70(3):195-283 
•    Bratzler DW, Dellinger EP, Olsen KM, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for antimicrobial 
India  
The above table is based on the following, but modified as per antimicrobial resistance pattern in 
weight (DW) can be determined as follows: DW   IBW + 0.4(actual weight – IBW). 
•     If the patient’s actual weight is more than 20% above ideal body weight (IBW), the dosing 
•     Dosing is based on the patient’s actual body weight. 
preoperatively. 
d In general, gentamicin for surgical antibiotic prophylaxis should be limited to a single dose given 
all ages, use of these agents for single-dose prophylaxis is generally safe. 
c While fluoroquinolones have been associated with an increased risk of tendinitis/tendon rupture in 
b When used as a single dose in combination with metronidazole for colorectal procedures. 
a The maximum paediatric dose should not exceed the usual adult dose. 
 
----------------Page (92) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
85 | Page  
    Elective,                                                       None                                         None  
Laparoscopic procedure                                                                                    
aminoglycosidee  
Metronidazole PLUS 
Ampicillin/sulbactamf            OR 
metronidazole                         PLUS aminoglycosidee  
Open procedure                                             Ceftriaxone +/-     Clindamycin or vancomycin 
 
Biliary tract  
morbid obesity, or cancer. 
outlet obstruction, gastric bleeding, 
decreased gastric motility, gastric 
gastroduodenal perforation, 
proton-pump inhibitors),                   
histamine H2-receptor antagonists or            aminoglycoside e  
gastric pH (e.g., those receiving             PLUS  
High-risk: patients with increased                                                     +  
Patients at high risk for infections            Ceftriaxone                              Clindamycin or vancomycin 
Patients at low risk for infections             None                                         None 
Decide as per risk of infections 
(antireflux, highly selective vagotomy) 
 
gastrointestinal tract                                                                                         
Procedures without entry into                                                        
pancreaticoduodenectomyd)                                                                          aminoglycosidee  
of gastrointestinal tract (bariatric,   metronidazole                         PLUS  
Procedures involving entry into lumen Ceftriaxone +/-     Clindamycin or vancomycin 
Gastroduodenalc                                                                                                
Ampicillin–sulbactam  
Video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery        Cefazolin OR                            Clindamycin,b vancomycinb  
metronidazole  
Esophageal surgery                                       Cefazolin PLUS    Clindamycin  
resection, and thoracotomy  
lobectomy, pneumonectomy, lung  Ampicillin–sulbactam  
Noncardiac procedures, including Cefazolin OR                            Clindamycin,b vancomycinb  
Thoracic  
implantation)                                                  colonized/infected)  
(e.g., pacemaker                                            (add vancomycin if MRSA 
Cardiac device insertion procedures Cefazolin                                   Clindamycin, vancomycin  
colonized/infected)  
sternotomy                                                      (add vancomycin if MRSA 
Coronary artery bypass, median  Cefazolin                                   Clindamycin,b vancomycinb  
Cardiac  
With β-Lactam  llergy 
Type of Procedure                        Recommended  gents a 
 lternative  gents in Pts 
 ntimicrobial Recommendations for Surgical Prophyla is 
 
----------------Page (93) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
86 | Page  
Piperacillin tazobactam  
OR                                              
+ metronidazole                      aminoglycosidee   
Colorectalh                                                      Ceftriaxone      Clindamycin PLUS 
herniorrhaphy)  
Hernia repair (hernioplasty and  Cefazolin                                   Clindamycin or vancomycin  
metronidazole                         aminoglycosidee  
Obstructed                                                      Ceftriaxone PLUS   Metronidazole PLUS  
metronidazole                          aminoglycosidee  
Nonobstructed                                               Ceftriaxone +/-     Clindamycin PLUS 
Small intestine                                                                                                    
aminoglycosidee or  
Metronidazole PLUS 
 
 
appendicitis                                                    metronidazole                         aminoglycosidee or  
 ppendectomy for uncomplicated  Ceftriaxone PLUS     Clindamycin PLUS 
to be) not complete. 
drainage is (or anticipated 
use prophylaxis if biliary 
treat existing cholangitis; 
recommendations for ERCP: 
Gastrointestinal Endoscopy 
be treated                                American Society of 
cholangitis, that needs to achieved. 
If there is existing  drainage cannot be 
                                                   likely when complete 
Piperacillin tazobactam         antibiotics; greatest benefit 
In such case use:                     benefit from prophylactic 
procedure.                               or sepsis and no further 
at the end of the    postprocedural cholangitis 
expected to be complete drainage will prevent 
biliary drainage is not achieving adequate 
ERCP                                                                 Use prophylaxis only if Most studies show that 
 
not prophylaxis. 
With cholangitis, treat as infection, 
other factors. (see foot note l) 
pregnancy, immunosuppression and 
common duct stones, diabetes, 
gallbladder, obstructive jaundice,           aminoglycosidee  
cholecystitis, non-functioning                Metronidazole PLUS 
High-risk: age >70 years, acute  Ampicillin/sulbactam             aminoglycosidee or  
   Patients at high risk for infectionsg          metronidazole                         PLUS 
   Elective,                                                        Ceftriaxone +/-     Clindamycin or vancomycin 
    (see foot note l) 
    Patients at low risk for infectionsg  
With β-Lactam  llergy 
Type of Procedure                        Recommended  gents a 
 lternative  gents in Pts 
 
----------------Page (94) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
87 | Page  
wires) or bone graft material 
devices (e.g., nails, screws, plates, colonized/infected) 
with implantation of internal fixation vancomycin if MRSA 
Open reduction of closed fractures Ceftriaxone (plus   Clindamycin,b vancomycinb  
Closed fractures                                                                                                 
implantation of foreign materials  
knee, or foot and not involving 
Clean operations involving hand, None                                         None  
 
Orthopedic  
abdominal)                                                     metronidazole,                        aminoglycoside  
Hysterectomy (vaginal or     Ceftriaxone +       Clindamycin + 
metronidazole                         + aminoglycosidee  
Cesarean delivery                                          Ceftriaxone +       Clindamycin 
metronidazole                         + aminoglycosidee  
Gynecologic Surgery                                      Ceftriaxone +       Clindamycin 
Transsphenoidal surgery                               Ceftriaxone                              Moxifloxacin  
colonized/infected)  
vancomycin if MRSA 
Spinal fusion                                                   Cefazolin (plus    Vancomycin  
Laminectomy                                                  Cefazolin                                   Clindamycin,b vancomycinb  
procedures  
cerebrospinal fluid-shunting                        colonized/infected)  
pumps, cranioplasty and      vancomycin if MRSA 
Elective craniotomy, intrathecal Cefazolin (and    Vancomycinb  
 
Neurosurgery  
Ampicillin/sulbactam  
metronidazole, 
Clean-contaminated cancer surgery           Cefazolin +      Clindamycinb  
repair  
tumor debulking, mandibular facture 
Clean with placement of a prosthesis, Ampicillin-sulbactam             Clindamycinb  
tonsillectomy  
parotidectomy, thyroidectomy, 
Clean or adenoidectomy,      None                                         None  
Tympanostomy tubes do not require prophylaxis. 
implanted.  
No prophylaxis for uncontaminated head and neck surgery unless prosthetic device is to be 
wound infection rate can be high. 
involving oral/pharyngeal mucosa (e.g., laryngeal or pharyngeal tumor) but even with prophylaxis, 
Antimicrobial prophylaxis in head and neck surgery appears efficacious only for procedures 
Head and neck  
+ aminoglycosidee  
 
                                                   Metronidazole 
With β-Lactam  llergy 
Type of Procedure                        Recommended  gents a 
 lternative  gents in Pts 
 
----------------Page (95) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
88 | Page  
prosthesis])  
material [e.g., penile 
placement of prosthetic 
recommended for 
aminoglycoside may be 
tract                                                                  a single dose of an 
Clean without entry into the urinary Cefazolin (the addition of Clindamycin,b vancomycinb  
 
(amikacin) 
aminoglycoside 
Single dose of 
Transrectal prostate biopsy                          Ceftriaxone OR 
 
isolated if possible. 
against pathogen 
an antimicrobial active 
prior to procedure using 
Treat patients with UTI 
(amikacin) 
TURP)                                                               aminoglycoside 
(ureteroscopy, biopsy, fulguration, Single dose of 
Cystoscopy with manipulation   Ceftriaxone OR                         
isolated if possible. 
against pathogen 
an antimicrobial active 
prior to procedure using 
Treat patients with UTI 
Cystoscopy                                                      Not required                             
 
 rologic  
Arthroscopy                                                    Cefazolin                                   Clindamycin  
hours 
May continue up to 24 
colonized/infected)  
instrumentation                                             vancomycin if MRSA 
Spinal procedures with and without Cefazolin (plus    Clindamycin,b vancomycinb  
hours  
May continue up to 24 
colonized/infected 
vancomycin if MRSA 
Total joint replacement                                 Cefazolin (plus    Clindamycin,b vancomycinb  
hours 
May continue up to 24 
colonized/infected  
vancomycin if MRSA 
Hip fracture repair                                         Cefazolin (plus    Clindamycin,b vancomycinb  
Open reduction of open fractures              days 
Open fractures                                               Treat as infected for 10  
With β-Lactam  llergy 
Type of Procedure                        Recommended  gents a 
 lternative  gents in Pts 
 
----------------Page (96) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
89 | Page  
not be needed when the lumen of the intestinal tract is not entered. 
gastric outlet obstruction, gastric bleeding, morbid obesity, or cancer. Antimicrobial prophylaxis may 
antagonists or proton-pump inhibitors), gastroduodenal perforation, decreased gastric motility, 
infections, such as those with increased gastric pH (e.g., those receiving histamine H2-receptor 
c Prophylaxis should be considered for patients at the highest risk for postoperative gastroduodenal 
 
another agent such as aminoglycoside. 
procedure. In that case, practitioners may consider combining clindamycin or vancomycin with 
surveillance data show that gram-negative organisms cause surgical-site infections (SSIs) for the 
additional agent with activity against those pathogens could be considered. For example, suppose 
b For procedures in which pathogens other than staphylococci and streptococci are likely, an 
 
reasonable to add a single preoperative dose of vancomycin to the recommended agent(s). 
a For patients known to be colonized with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, it is 
 
colonized/infected)  
(add vancomycin if MRSA 
contaminated                                                 ampicillin/sulbactam 
Clean with risk factors or clean-   Cefazolin,      Clindamycin,b vancomycinb  
 
Plastic surgery  
donor  
Renal transplantation/live adult Cefazolin                                   Clindamycin  
Gram negative coverage  
+  
Liver transplantation                                    Piperacillin/tazobactam         Clindamycin or vancomycin 
incision                                                             metronidazole                         gentamicin  
Abdominal aorta procedure or groin Cefazolin +      Vancomycin plus 
grafts or lower extremity procedures  
Upper extremity procedures with  Cefazolin                                   Clindamycin or vancomycin  
procedures  
Carotid or brachiocephalic    Not recommended                   
Vasculari                                                                                                              
exenteration)  
conduit, cystoprostatectomy, anterior 
cystectomy, ileal         metronidazole                         clindamycin or vancomycin  
Clean-contaminated (radical    Ceftriaxone +     Aminoglycosidee +  
aminoglycoside  
single dose of an 
tract                                                                  PLUS the addition of a with or without clindamycin  
Clean with entry into the urinary Cefazolin or vancomycin Aminoglycosidee  
+ aminoglycoside                    aminoglycoside  
Clean, involving implanted prosthesis        Cefazolin or vancomycin Clindamycin + 
With β-Lactam  llergy 
Type of Procedure                        Recommended  gents a 
 lternative  gents in Pts 
 
----------------Page (97) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
90 | Page  
                                                           
implantation (e.g., carotid endarterectomy) may benefit from prophylaxis. 
support, patients undergoing brachiocephalic procedures involving vascular prostheses or patch 
i Prophylaxis is not routinely indicated for brachiocephalic procedures. Although there are no data in 
 
addition to i.v. prophylaxis. 
oral erythromycin base or with oral neomycin sulphate plus oral metronidazole should be given in 
h For most patients, a MECHANICAL bowel preparation combined with oral neomycin sulphate plus 
 
undergoing laparoscopic cholecystectomy. 
intervention, it may be reasonable to give a single dose of antimicrobial prophylaxis to all patients 
prosthetic device. Because a number of these risk factors cannot be determined before surgical 
spillage, jaundice, pregnancy, nonfunctioning gallbladder, immunosuppression, and insertion of 
reintervention in less than one month for a non-infectious complication, acute cholecystitis, bile 
Anesthesiologists classification of 3 or greater, episode of colic within 30 days before the procedure, 
>70 years, conversion from laparoscopic to open cholecystectomy, American Society of 
emergency procedures, diabetes, long procedure duration, intraoperative gallbladder rupture, age of 
g Factors that indicate a high risk of infectious complications in laparoscopic cholecystectomy include 
 
susceptibility profiles should be reviewed before use. 
f Due to increasing resistance of Escherichia coli to ampicillin/sulbactam, local population 
 
e Gentamicin or tobramycin. 
d Consider additional antimicrobial coverage with infected biliary tract. 
 
 
----------------Page (98) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
91 | Page  
GI, reproductive organ, and G  procedures 
(for routine dental cleaning such as scaling, prophylaxis is indicated, but the benefit is uncertain) 
Bleeding from trauma to lips or oral mucosa 
Shedding deciduous teeth 
Adjustment of orthodontic appliances or orthodontic brackets 
Placement of removable prosthodontic or orthodontic applications 
Dental imaging 
Anesthetic injections through uninfected tissue 
Dental procedures  
PROCED RES  for which IE prophyla is is NOT recommended: 
Procedures on infected skin or subcutaneous tissue. Example: abscess 
there is an active infection, tailor antibiotic selection based on suspected/confirmed infection. 
Procedures that involve incision of respiratory mucosa. Example: tonsillectomy, and adenoidectomy. If 
Respiratory procedures 
uncertain. 
2.   For  routine  dental  cleaning  such  as  scaling,  prophylaxis  is  indicated,  but  the  benefit  is 
apicoectomy 
subgingival  scaling  and  root  planning,  replantation  of  avulsed  teeth,  implant  placement, 
the oral mucosa. Example: tooth extraction, drainage of a dental abscess, periodontal surgery, 
1.   Procedures involving manipulation of the gingiva, periapical area of teeth, or perforation of 
Dental procedures 
PROCED RES  for which IE prophyla is is recommended: 
4.   Pacemaker  
3.   ICD 
the site or adjacent to the site of a prosthetic patch or prosthetic device) 
2.   Acyanotic congenital heart disease such as ASD, VSD, PDA (unless repaired with residual defects at 
1.   Valvular heart disease unless there is previous endocarditis. 
CONDITIONS for which IE prophyla is is NOT recommended: 
6.   Durable mechanical circulatory support device (ventricular assist device or artificial heart). 
5.   A heart transplant with valvulopathy 
or prosthetic device (this inhibits endothelization) 
•    Repaired CHD with residual defects at the site or adjacent to the site of a prosthetic patch 
procedure (endothelization takes 6 months) 
placed  by  surgery  or  by  catheter  intervention,  during  the  first  6  months  after  the 
•    Completely repaired congenital heart defect with prosthetic material or device, whether 
•    Unrepaired cyanotic CHD with or without palliative shunts and conduits. 
4.   Congenital heart disease 
annuloplasty ring) 
3.   Heart  valve  with  prosthetic  material  (native  valve  repair  using  prosthetic  material  such  as  clip, 
2.   Prosthetic heart valve.  
1.   Previous endocarditis 
CONDITIONS  for which IE prophyla is is recommended: 
 
XIX.  Infective Endocarditis Prophyla is 
 
----------------Page (99) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
92 | Page  
                                                           
 
 
for patients with history of anaphylaxis, angioedema, or urticaria with penicillin or ampicillin. 
The selected drug should be given 30 to 60 min prior to the procedure. Cephalosporins should not be used 
 
IV, (up to 2 g)                  to 1 g) 
Vancomycin 
15 to 20 mg/kg 15 mg/kg IV (up 
and not able to take oral medication) 
(If allergic to penicillin or ampicillin 
Parenteral 
Ceftriaxone                                                             IV 
1 g IM or IV 
Cefazolin or                                                 50 mg/kg IM or 
>45 kg, 100 mg 
Doxycycline                     100 mg 
mg/kg 
<45 kg, 2.2 
or 
(If allergic to penicillin or ampicillin) 
clarithromycin 
Oral                                                                                     500 mg                     15 mg/kg 
Azithromycin or 
or 
Cephalexin                         2 g                         50 mg/kg 
ceftriaxone                                                              IV 
1 g IM or IV 
Cefazolin or                                                 50 mg/kg IM or 
(if unable to take oral medication) 
or 
Parenteral 
IV 
Ampicillin                   2 g IM or IV 
50 mg/kg IM or 
Oral                                            Amoxicillin                         2 g                         50 mg/kg 
Situation                              Drug                   Adult              Children 
Drug selection 
 
----------------Page (100) Break----------------
Antibiotic Policy – 2026 – JIPMER – ver1.0(202604061000) 
93 | Page  
 
5.   UpToDate, Wolters Kluwer; available at: https://www.uptodate.com 
https://www.hopkinsguides.com/hopkins/index/Johns_Hopkins_ABX_Guide/All_Topics/A 
4.   Johns Hopkins ABX Guide. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University; available at: 
antimicrobial therapy 2023. 53rd ed. Sperryville, VA (USA): Jay P; 2023. 
3.   Gilbert, David N, Chambers H. F, Saag M. S, Pavia A, Boucher H. W et al. The Sanford guide to 
Diseases. 9th ed. Philadelphia (USA): Elsevier; 2020. 
2.   Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ. Mandell Douglas and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious 
Medicine. 21st ed. New York (USA): McGraw Hill;2022. 
1.   Loscalzo J, Fauci A, Kasper D, Hauser S, Longo D, Jameson J. Harrison's Principles of Internal 
 
XX.   Bibliography 
 
----------------Page (101) Break----------------

----------------Page (102) Break----------------

----------------Page (103) Break----------------
